{{also|衔环}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=衔环}}

===Etymology===
[[銜]] (to [[receive]]) + [[環]] (a [[jade]] [[loop]] [[pendant]])
* ''c.'' '''469 - 520''': Wu Jun ([[:zh:w:吳均|吳均]]) [[:zh:s:續齊諧記|續齊諧記]] (''More Tales of the Strange and Unsual'')
*: [[弘農]][[楊寶]]，[[性]][[慈愛]]。[[年]][[九]][[歲]]，[[至]][[華陰]][[山]]，[[見]][[一]][[黃雀]][[為]][[鴟梟]][[所]][[搏]]，[[逐]][[樹]][[下]]，[[傷瘢]][[甚]][[多]]，[[宛轉]][[復]][[為]][[螻蟻]][[所]][[困]]。[[寶]][[懷]][[之]][[以]][[歸]]，[[置]][[諸]][[樑]][[上]]。[[夜]][[聞]][[啼]][[聲]][[甚]][[切]]，[[親自]][[照]][[視]]，[[為]][[蚊]][[所]][[嚙]]，[[乃]][[移置]][[巾箱]][[中]]，[[啖]][[以]][[黃花]]。[[逮]][[十]][[餘]][[日]]，[[毛羽]][[成]]，[[飛翔]]，[[朝]][[去]][[暮]][[來]]，[[宿]][[巾箱]][[中]]，[[如此]][[積年]]。[[忽]][[與]][[群]][[雀]][[俱]][[來]]，[[哀]][[鳴]][[繞]][[堂]]，[[數]][[日]][[乃]][[去]]。[[是]][[夕]]，[[寶]][[三更]][[讀書]]，[[有]][[黃衣]][[童子]][[曰]]：「[[我]]，[[王母]][[使者]]。[[昔]][[使]][[蓬萊]]，[[為]][[鴟梟]][[所]][[搏]]，[[蒙]][[君]][[之]][[仁愛]][[見]][[救]]，[[今]][[當]][[受]][[賜]][[南海]]。」[[別]][[以]][[四]][[玉環|玉'''環''']][[與]][[之]]，[[曰]]：「[[令]][[君]][[子孫]][[潔白]]，[[且]][[從]][[登]][[三公]]，[[事]][[如此]][[環]][[矣]]。」[[寶]][[之]][[孝]][[大]][[聞]][[天下]]，[[名位]][[日]][[隆]]。[[子]][[震]]，[[震]][[生]][[秉]]，[[秉]][[生]][[彪]]，[[四]][[世]][[名]][[公]]。[[及]][[震]][[葬]][[時]]，[[有]][[大]][[鳥]][[降]]，[[人]][[皆]][[謂]][[真]][[孝]][[招]][[也]]。
*:: ''Yang Bao of [[w:Lingbao, Henan|Hongnong]] (near [[present]] [[day]] [[w:Lingbao, Henan|Lingbao]]) had a compassionate nature. When he was nine years old, he travelled to the northern side of [[w:Mount Hua|Mount Hua]], where he spotted a [[w:Eurasian Siskin|yellow finch]] being struck by an [[owl]], causing it to fall from a tree. As it writhed on the ground, ants and other insects started to swarm around it. Bao picked it up and took it home with him. When he got home, he placed it on a cross beam in his house. That night, he heard a shrill cry, so he went to take a look. He discovered that the bird was being bitten by mosquitoes, so he placed the bird in a small box. He fed the bird dried flowers. After ten or more days, the bird's feathers had reached full size, so that it could now fly. It would leave in the morning and come back in the evening, sleeping in the small box. This went on for more than a year, when one day, a flock of finches arrived. The finches flew around the house and cried plaintively. Within a few days, the bird departed with them. That evening, Bao was still reading at midnight, when a small child in yellow clothes arrived, saying, "I am an emissary of the [[w:Queen Mother of the West|Queen Mother]]. On the day that I was struck by the owl, I had been dispatched from [[w:Mount Penglai|Mount Penglai]]. I was saved because of your kindness, and now I would like nothing better than for you to accept a gift from the southern seas." The emissary especially presented Bao with four '''jade loop pendants''', saying, "I command that your offspring shall be pure. Furthermore, they shall all follow in your footsteps, and become one of the [[w:Three Excellencies|Three Excellencies]]. Thus, I shall repay you for your kindness." Bao's [[filial piety]] became known throughout the land, and his prestige grew with each passing day. His son was Zhen. Zhen begat Bing. Bing begat Biao. For four generations, a member of the Yang family served as one of the [[w:Three Excellencies|Three Excellencies]]. At the time of Zhen's funeral (in 154), a large bird swooped down. Everyone said that the bird had been attracted by the true [[filial piety]] of the Yang family.'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=xiánhuán
|cat=v
}}

===Verb===
{{zh-verb}}

# {{lb|zh|literary}} to [[repay]] a [[debt]] (of [[kindness]] etc.)

====Derived terms====
* {{zh-l|結草銜環}}