==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Etymology===
From [[先]] (xiān, Old Chinese *''sɯːn(s)'', "before, ahead") and [[生]] (shēng, OC *''shleːŋ'', *''sreŋs'', "to be born"), i.e. "one who was born earlier". Attested in ''{{w|Shijing}}'' ("first child"), ''{{w|Yili (text)|Yili}}'' ("elder brother"), ''{{w|Classic of Rites}}'' ("teacher"), ''{{w|Mencius (book)|Mengzi}}'' ("a knowledgeable elder").

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=xiānshēng,tl=y
|c=sin1 saang1
|g=xien1 sen
|h=pfs=sîn-sâng
|j=xie1 seng1
|md=sĭng-săng
|mn=xm,qz,tp,kh,lk,sx,km,mg,hc:sian-siⁿ/zz,yl,tc:sin-seⁿ/tn:sian-seⁿ/zz:sian-seng
|mn_note=When following a surname, it is read in the neutral tone
|mn-t=sing1 sên1
|w=1xi san
|ma=zh-xiānsheng.ogg
|ca=zh-yue-先生.ogg
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# {{lb|zh|Beginning Mandarin}} [[mister]], [[sir]]
#: {{zh-x|王 先生 來 了。|'''Mr.''' Wang came.}}
#: {{zh-x|王 %先生 來 %矣。|'''Mr.''' Ong came.|MN}}
# {{lb|zh|formal}} [[husband]]
# {{lb|zh|Gan|Hakka|Min|dated|_|in|_|Mandarin|&|Jin}} [[doctor]]
#* {{zh-x|大哥 說：「^今天 請 ^何 先生 來，給 你 診 一 診。」|My elder brother said, "Today, I've invited '''Dr.''' He to come and give you a check up."|ref='''1918:''' {{w|Lu Xun}}, ''[[s:Translation:Call to Arms (Lu Xun)/A Madman's Diary|A Madman's Diary]]''}}
# {{lb|zh|Cantonese|Gan|Hakka|Min|dated|_|in|_|Mandarin|honorific|_|in|_|Jin}} [[teacher]]
#* {{zh-x|他 在 學堂 的 時候，先生 問 他：「^直隸 省{Shěng} 的 西邊 是 哪 一 省{shěng}？」^他 說 是 ^陝西。先生 說：「^錯 了，是 ^山西，不是 ^陝西。」^他 說：「^陝西 同 ^山西，不是 差不多 嗎？」|When he went to school, the '''teacher''' asked him: "Which province is west of [[Hebei|Zhili]] Province?" He answered [[Shaanxi]]. The '''teacher''' said: "Wrong, it is [[Shanxi]], not Shaanxi." He said: "Would Shaanxi and Shanxi not be close enough?"|ref='''1924:''' {{w|Hu Shih}}, ''[[wikilivres:差不多先生傳|Life of Mr. Close Enough]]''}}
#* {{zh-x|'''先{Sian}生{siⁿ}''' 講，學生 恬恬 聽。|The teacher speaks, and the students silently listen.|MN|a=Taiwanese_Kana_Example.ogg}}

====Synonyms====
* {{sense|doctor}}
{{zh-dial|醫生}}
* {{sense|teacher}} {{zh-l|老師}}

====Descendants====
{{CJKV||せんせい|선생|tiên sinh}}

===See also===
* {{zh-l|太太}}
* {{sense|Mr.}} {{zh-l|氏}}

===References===
*{{qualifier|Min Nan}} {{thcwd|2069}}

{{zh-cat|Family}}

----

==Japanese==
{{ja-kanjitab|せん|せい|yomi=on}}

===Etymology===
From {{etyl|ltc|ja|sort=せんせい}} compound {{m|zh|先生|tr=sen sræng|lit=first + to be born}}.

===Pronunciation===
{{ja-pron|yomi=kanon|せんせい|acc=3|acc_ref=DJR}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|せんせい}}

# one who was born earlier: an [[elder]]
# one who excels at a subject: a [[scholar]]
# one who teaches: a [[teacher]] or [[professor]]
# [[sensei]] {{gloss|Japanese martial arts teacher}}
# [[sir]], a polite form of address to teachers, doctors, etc.

====Usage notes====
This is a term of respect, reserved only for speaking about others, and considered somewhat impolite (immodest) to use when referring to oneself. Instead, the term {{m|ja|教師|tr=kyōshi||teacher|lit=teaching + teacher}} is considered more socially appropriate when referring to oneself.

====Derived terms====
{{der-top}}
* {{ja-r|大先生|だいせんせい}}: great teacher, high authority
{{der-bottom}}

===Suffix===
{{ja-pos|せんせい|suffix}}

# a title used after the name of teachers, [[doctor]]s, [[lawyer]]s, or certain other [[professional]]s

===See also===
* {{ja-r|師匠|ししょう}}: a [[master]], a [[teacher]]
* {{ja-r|医師|いし}}: a medical [[doctor]]
* {{ja-r|教師|きょうし}}: a teacher
* {{ja-r|教授|きょうじゅ}}: a professor
* {{ja-r|弁護士|べんごし}}: an [[attorney]], a [[lawyer]]

===References===
<references/>
:* {{R:Shogakukan}}

----

==Korean==
{{ko-hanjatab}}

===Noun===
{{ko-noun|hj|hangeul=선생}}

# {{hanja form of|선생|[[teacher]]}}

----

==Vietnamese==
{{vi-hantutab}}

===Noun===
{{vi-hantu}}

# {{han tu form of|tiên sinh|[[teacher]]}}

[[zh-min-nan:先生]]
[[el:先生]]
[[fr:先生]]
[[ko:先生]]
[[sw:先生]]
[[ky:先生]]
[[lo:先生]]
[[lv:先生]]
[[lt:先生]]
[[li:先生]]
[[hu:先生]]
[[mg:先生]]
[[fj:先生]]
[[ja:先生]]
[[pl:先生]]
[[pt:先生]]
[[ru:先生]]
[[fi:先生]]
[[sv:先生]]
[[ta:先生]]
[[th:先生]]
[[chr:先生]]
[[uk:先生]]
[[zh:先生]]