==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=倾国}}

===Etymology===
* '''111:''' {{w|Ban Gu}}, ''{{w|Book of Han}}, Chapter 67, Biographies of the emperor's maternal relatives'' ([[:zh:source:漢書|漢書]]外戚傳第六十七)
*: [[孝武]][[李夫人]]，[[本]][[以]][[倡]][[進]]。[[初]]，[[夫人]][[兄]][[李延年|延年]][[性]][[知]][[音]]，[[善]][[歌舞]]，[[漢武帝|武帝]][[愛]][[之]]。[[每]][[為]][[新]][[聲]][[變]][[曲]]，[[聞]][[者]][[莫]][[不]][[感動]]。[[李延年|延年]][[侍]][[上]][[起]][[舞]]，[[歌]][[曰]]：「[[北方]][[有]][[佳人]]，[[絕世]][[而]][[獨立]]，[[一]][[顧]][[傾]][[人]][[城]]，[[再]][[顧]][[傾]][[人]][[國]]。[[寧]][[不知]][[傾城]][[與]]'''傾國'''，[[佳人]][[難]][[再]][[得]]！」[[上]][[歎息]][[曰]]：「[[善]]！[[世]][[豈]][[有]][[此]][[人]][[乎]]？」[[平陽]][[主因]][[言]][[李延年|延年]][[有]][[女]][[弟]]，[[上]][[乃]][[召見]][[之]]，[[實]][[妙麗]][[善]][[舞]]。[[由]][[是]][[得]][[幸]]，[[生]][[一]][[男]]，[[是]][[為]][[昌邑哀王]]。
*:: ''Consort Li, concubine to the [[w:Emperor Wu of Han|Emperor Wu of Han]], was originally a dancing performer. Her brother [[w:Li Yannian|Yannian]] was a gifted musician and dancer, beloved by the emperor. Every time he composed something new, it never failed to move those listening to it. One day, [[w:Li Yannian|Yannian]] did a dance and sang, "There is a beauty in the north, who stands out among the generations. One look will topple the men of the city. A second look will topple the men of the country. I would rather not know about toppled cities and '''toppled countries''', because a beauty of this caliber may not come around again!" His majesty sighed and said, "Wow! Can there really be such a person in this world?" Whereupon Pingyang mentioned that [[w:Li Yannian|Yannian]] had a sister. His majesty summoned her, and she was indeed a sight to behold, and a good dancer. As a result, she received the emperor's favor, and bore him a son; this was Prince Ai of Changyi.'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=qīngguó
|c=king1 gwok3
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# {{lb|zh|archaic}} a drop-dead gorgeous woman; a beauty who could drive a man to distraction; a woman so beautiful, that he might be tempted to ignore his duties at court, and thus bring about the downfall of his empire
#* '''806:''' {{w|Bai Juyi}}, ''[[wikisource:Song of Everlasting Regret|Song of Everlasting Regret]]''
#*: [[漢]][[皇]][[重]][[色]][[思]]'''傾國'''
#*:: ''A certain emperor of the [[w:Han dynasty|Han dynasty]]<ref group=note>A reference to the {{w|Emperor Xuanzong of Tang}}, whose relationship to {{w|Yang Guifei}} brought to mind the {{w|Emperor Wu of Han}}'s relationship to his concubine, Consort Li. Bai Juyi would have considered it unpoetic to refer to his subject directly.</ref> placed a premium on his dalliances, and longed for '''a woman so beautiful, that he might be tempted to ignore his duties at court, and thus bring about the downfall of his empire'''.''

====Related terms====
* {{zh-l|傾城}}

===Notes===
<references group=note />

[[et:傾國]]
[[ja:傾國]]