==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|many; much|few; little}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=duōshǎo,tl=y
|c=do1 siu2
|ma=zh-duōshao.ogg
|cat=a
}}

====Adjective====
{{zh-adj}}

# {{lb|zh|interrogative}} [[how many]]; [[how much]]
#: {{zh-x|你 要 多少{shǎo}？|'''How much''' do you want?}}
#: {{zh-x|這 個 班 有 多少{shǎo} 男生？|'''How many''' boys are in this class?}}
# {{lb|zh|when duplicated in a sentence}} [[as much as]]; as many as
#: {{zh-x|你 要 多少{shǎo} 就 拿 多少{shǎo}。|Take '''as many as''' you want.}}
#: {{zh-x|你 需要 多少{shǎo} 複印件 就 複印 多少{shǎo} 吧。|Make '''as many''' photocopies '''as''' you need.}}

=====Usage notes=====
Sometimes {{zh-l|多少}} is used in ways that the English terms ''how many'' and ''how much'' are not; for example, in Mandarin it is common to ask:
:{{zh-x|你 的 電話.號碼 是 多少{shǎo}？|What is your phone number? (lit. "How many/much is your phone number?")}}
:{{zh-x|你 的 電子.郵件 是 多少{shǎo}？|What is your email address? (lit. "How many/much is your email address?")}}
This usage of ''how many'' may have become prevalent on account of the fact that phone numbers - as well as many email addresses in China - are made up completely of digits.

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial}}

====See also====
* {{zh-l|幾}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=duōshǎo
|c=do1 siu2
|h=pfs=tô-séu
|mn=to-siáu
|cat=adv,n
}}

====Noun====
{{zh-noun}}

# [[amount]]; how much; how many
#: {{zh-x|所得稅 的 多少{shǎo} 取決 於 你 的 收入。|'''How much''' income tax you pay depends on your income.}}

====Adverb====
{{zh-adv}}

# [[somewhat]]; [[more or less]]
#: {{zh-x|這 種 描述 多少{shǎo} 有 點 準確性。|The description is '''more or less''' accurate.}}

{{zh-cat|Beginning|Antonymous}}

----

==Japanese==
{{ja-kanjitab|た|しょう|yomi=on}}

===Adverb===
{{ja-pos|たしょう|adverb}}

# [[little]], [[somewhat]], [[rather]], [[quite]]

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|たしょう}}

# [[amount]], [[number]]

[[fr:多少]]
[[ko:多少]]
[[lt:多少]]
[[hu:多少]]
[[mg:多少]]
[[ja:多少]]
[[pl:多少]]
[[ta:多少]]
[[chr:多少]]
[[uk:多少]]
[[zh:多少]]