{{character info/new}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|stroke=11}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|你|t1=you|心|t2=heart|ls=ic}}.

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=61|rad=心|as=07|sn=11|four=27339|canj=OFP|ids=⿱你心}}

===References===
* {{Han ref|kx=0388.341|dkj=10712|dj=0721.230|hdz=42301.020|uh=60A8|ud=|bh=|bd=}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Alternative forms===
* {{zh-l|恁}}
* {{zh-l|𠑓}}

===Etymology===
This character was not listed in Sui/Tang rhyme books. First attested in Jin/Yuan-era novels, when it was also written as {{zh-l|恁}} (original MC pron. ȵʑǐĕm), and occurred predominantly in attributive environments, forming complementary distribution with {{zh-l|你}} in other cases. Originally, 您 was a pronoun for both 2nd sg. and 2nd pl., and {{zh-l|你每}} (> {{zh-l|你們}}) was an equilibrating disyllabic version of 您, which retains the -m syllable coda of 您 disappearing in Mandarin. Later, in the Beijing dialect, -{{zh-l|們}} was restricted to purely a plural suffix, and 您 restricted to purely a 2nd sg. honorific pronoun, although the 2nd pl. hon. {{zh-l|您們}} is still considered ungrammatical by some speakers. The plural sense of 您 is retained in the Tianjin dialect:
{{zh-x|您 了 先 聊，我 到 外頭 溜達{da} 溜達{da}。|Please continue your conversation. I'll just be having a walk outside.|M-TJ}}
and in Min {{zh-l|恁}}.<ref>吕叔湘 (Lü Shuxiang)，《释您，俺，咱，喒，附论们字》，in 《吕叔湘全集》第二卷 汉语语法论文集。</ref><ref>张俊阁，《近代汉语第二人称代词“您（恁）”的来源》，聊城大学学报（社会科学版），2010年第1期。</ref>

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=nín
|ma=zh-nín.ogg
|c=nei5
|h=pfs=
|mn=lín
|w=
|mc=
|oc=
|cat=pron
}}

===Definitions===
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|polite}} [[you]]
# {{lb|zh|dialectal}} [[you]] {{qualifier|plural}}

====Synonyms====
* {{qualifier|informal}} {{zh-l|你}}
* {{qualifier|archaic}} {{zh-l|爾}}
* {{qualifier|archaic}} {{zh-l|汝}}

===See also===
{{cmn-personal pronouns}}

====References====
<references />

{{zh-cat|Beginning}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=|rs=心07}}

# {{defn|lang=ja|sort=心07}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=[[に]] (ni)
|kanon=[[じ]] (ji)
|kun= [[なんじ]] (nanji), [[しかり]] (shikari), [[その]] (sono), [[のみ]] (nomi)
}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[nâm]]|rs=心07}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=心07}}

[[da:您]]
[[fr:您]]
[[it:您]]
[[li:您]]
[[hu:您]]
[[mg:您]]
[[ms:您]]
[[ja:您]]
[[no:您]]
[[pl:您]]
[[pt:您]]
[[fi:您]]
[[ta:您]]
[[th:您]]
[[chr:您]]
[[tr:您]]
[[uk:您]]
[[zh:您]]