{{character info/new}}
{{also|厶}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|strokes=7}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=115|rad=禾|as=02|sn=7|four=22930|canj=HDI|ids=⿰禾厶}}

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=0849.050|dkj=24913|dj=1271.020|hdz=42589.060|uh=79C1|ud=31169|bh=A870|bd=43120}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etym}}
{{Han compound|禾|厶|c1=s|c2=p|t1=grain|ls=psc}}.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=sī
|c=si1
|h=pfs=sṳ̂
|md=sĭ
|mn=qz:sir/tw,xm,zz:su/sai
|mn_note=sir/su - literary; sai - vernacular
|w=1sr
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=a
}}

===Definitions===
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[self]]; [[personal]]; [[private]]
#: {{zh-x|私人|personal}}
#: {{zh-x|私有|private}}
# [[selfish]]
#: {{zh-x|自私|selfish}}

===Compounds===
{{zh-der|公私兩全|偏私|徇私廢公|國際私法|公私兩盡|公私|微服私行|憂公忘私|吃私|公報私仇|憂國忘私|憂公無私|公私兩便|中飽私囊|彈劾無私|徇私作弊|恩私|切切私語|忝私|一己之私|公爾忘私|徇私舞弊|床笫之私|公報私讎|光私|徇公滅私|少私寡慾|徇私|家私|官報私仇|公耳忘私|以私廢公|公私分明|假公濟私|以公滅私|大飽私囊|大公無私|公私兼顧|因公假私|公私兩濟|因公行私|先公後私|公而忘私|公私皆辦|宴私|暗室私心|私窠子|私營|私鹽|私話|私生子|私欲|私慾|燕私|私產|私立|私塾|私吞|私諡|營私舞弊|秉公無私|私囊|私房買賣|私地|私行|私房|私通|私益|私酒|私心雜念|私奔|私累|私有財產|私債|私逃|私念|私仇|私處|私販|私錢|私室|私房錢|私見|私印|私邸|烏鳥私情|私相授受|私帑|私科子|私鬥|私館|私章|私闖|私門|私貨|私諱|私語|私訪|私計|私言|私藏|私臣|私第|私窩子|私用|私淑|私法|私權|私梟|私校保險|私曲|私暱|私意|私情|私心藏奸|私心|私德|私弊|私底下|私己|私家|私娼|私塾先生|私名號|私史|私利|私交|私了|私下|私恩小惠|萬貫家私|私函|私度|有私|私屬|無私有弊|私房話|私刑|私自|私有|睚眥之私|私言切語|私商|私心話|私有制|無私|私談|營私|私事|私人|正直無私|植黨營私|私田|滅私奉公|拜恩私第|私怨|藏私|開私門|自私|自私自利|賣公營私|緝私|角巾私第|鐵面無私|隱私權|竊竊私議|鴻私|竊竊私語|販私|骨肉私情|阿私|結黨營私|陰私|隱私|走私|銅斗家私|言不及私|緣私|至公無私}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=6|rs=禾02}}

# [[private]], [[personal]]
# [[I]], [[me]]

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=[[し]] (shi)
|kanon=[[し]] (shi)
|kun=[[わたくし]] (watakushi), [[わたし]] (watashi), [[わっし]] (wasshi) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[わし]] (washi) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[わい]] (wai) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[わたい]] (watai) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[わて]] (wate) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[わちき]] (wachiki) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[あて]] (ate) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[あたし]] (atashi) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[あたい]] (atai) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[あし]] (ashi) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[あっし]] (asshi) {{non-joyo-reading}}, [[ひそか]] (hisoka) {{non-joyo-reading}}
}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top|Compounds starting with 私}}
* {{ja-r|私する|わたくし する}}: To [[appropriate]], [[embezzle]], [[use]] for personal purposes.
* {{ja-r|私バス|しバス}}: A privately operated bus.
* {{ja-r|私愛|しあい}}: [[favoritism|Favoritism]], [[partiality]]; a secret love for a woman; the woman so loved.
* {{ja-r|私安警察|しあん けいさつ}}: [[private|Private]] [[police]].
* {{ja-r|私案|しあん}}: A [[private]] [[plan]] or [[proposal]].
* {{ja-r|私意|し.い}}: A [[personal]] [[opinion]]; a [[bias]]; [[selfishness]].
* {{ja-r|私稲|しとう}}: In the Nara and Heian Periods, rice plants owned by an individual rather than by the state.
* {{ja-r|私印|し.いん}}: A [[private]] [[sigil]], [[signet]], [[stamp]], or [[seal]].
* {{ja-r|私印偽造|し.いんぎぞう}}: Creating a [[copy]] of someone else's sigil to [[forge]] their stamp.
* {{ja-r|私雨|わたくし あめ}}: A [[sudden]] [[rain shower]] falling in just a small area.
* {{ja-r|私営|しえい}}: Private [[operation]], privately operated.
* {{ja-r|私営鉄道|しえい てつどう}}: A privately operated [[railway]], private [[rails]].
* {{ja-r|私営田|しえいでん}}: In the Heian Period, fields used for large-scale private farming by powerful clans, rather than public farming by the state.
* {{ja-r|私益|しえき}}: Private or [[individual]] [[profit]] or [[gain]].
* {{ja-r|私謁|しえつ}}: An [[audience]] with the [[emperor]] regarding a [[private]] [[matter]]; a private rather than public request.
* {{ja-r|私怨|しえん}}: A private [[grudge]], [[hatred]], [[ill will]].
* {{ja-r|私恩|しおん}}: A [[favor]] or [[duty]] owed to an individual.
* {{ja-r|私恩を売る|しおん を うる}}: To use one's own position to get someone else to owe one a favor.
* {{ja-r|私家|しか}}: One's own home; an individual's home, as opposed to the palace or an office.
* {{ja-r|私家集|しかしゅう}}: In the Edo Period and earlier, an individual's [[collection]] or [[anthology]] of poetry.
* {{ja-r|私家版|しかばん}}: [[self-publishing|Self-publishing]], generally without [[profit]] [[motive]] and with limited [[distribution]]; a [[private]] [[printing]] or private [[edition]].
* {{ja-r|私学|しがく}}: An individual's [[school]] of [[thought]]; a private [[school]], as opposed to public.
* {{ja-r|私学校|しがっこう}}: A private [[school]], as opposed to public.
* {{ja-r|私学助成|しがく じょせい}}: [[government|Government]] [[subsidization]] of private [[education]].
* {{ja-r|私感|しかん}}: One's personal [[feeling]] about something.
* {{ja-r|私間法|しかんほう}}: Alternate for {{ja-r|国際私法|こくさい しほう}}: "conflict of laws", or "private international law".
* {{ja-r|私企業|しきぎょう}}: [[private|Private]] [[enterprise]]; a privately [[owned]] company.
* {{ja-r|私記|しき}}: A private record of something.
* {{ja-r|私戯|わたく したわぶれ}}: [[chat up|Chatting up]] a go-between or [[mediator]], as an aside to the main issue being mediated.
* {{ja-r|私擬憲法|しぎけんぽう}}: A privately [[drafted]] [[constitution]], more specifically the Japanese constitution created during 1880-1887.
* {{ja-r|私義務|し ぎむ}}: A [[duty]] or [[obligation]] arising from [[private law]].
* {{ja-r|私議|しぎ}}: [[secret|Secret]] [[criticism]], [[badmouthing]]; a personal or private opinion.
* {{ja-r|私共|わたくしども}}, {{ja-r|私共|わたしども}}: A [[humble]] word ({{ja-r|謙譲語|けんじょうご}} for "we", "us".
* {{ja-r|私教類聚|しきょう るいじゅう}}: Japan's oldest collection of moral instructions, written by [[w:Kibi Makibi|Kibi Makibi]] in the 700s.
* {{ja-r|私業|しぎょう}}: Word done as an individual; work done for individual profit.
* {{ja-r|私曲|しきょく}}: An [[unjust]] act committed solely to benefit oneself.
* {{ja-r|私金|しきん}}: Private [[money]]; money owned by an individual.
* {{ja-r|私銀|わたくしがね}}, {{ja-r|私金|わたくしがね}}: Personal money, secret [[savings]], a [[financial]] [[nest egg]].
* {{ja-r|私軍|わたくし いくさ}}, {{ja-r|私戦|わたくし いくさ}}: A private [[feud]].
* {{ja-r|私戦|わたくし たたかい}}: A private [[feud]].
* {{ja-r|私刑|しけい}}: A [[punishment]] [[mete]]d out by [[vigilante]] or [[mob]] [[justice]].
* {{ja-r|私恵|しけい}}: A private [[favor]].
* {{ja-r|私経済|しけいざい}}: A private [[economy]]: economic dealings between private individuals or companies.
* {{ja-r|私計|しけい}}: One's own [[thought]]s and [[opinion]]s; one's own [[scheme]]s or [[plan]]s.
* {{ja-r|私隙|しげき}}: Private [[discord]].
* {{ja-r|私権|しけん}}: Private or personal [[right]]s.
* {{ja-r|私見|しけん}}: A [[humble]] word ({{ja-r|謙譲語|けんじょうご}} for one's own personal [[opinion]]s.
* {{ja-r|私語|しご}}: A [[whisper]], [[whispering]], private [[conversation]].
* {{ja-r|私語く|ささやく}}: To [[whisper]], to [[rumor]].
* {{ja-r|私交|しこう}}: Personal or private [[friendship]] or [[socializing]].
* {{ja-r|私考|しこう}}: One's own personal [[thought]]s.
* {{ja-r|私行|しこう}}: Private actions in one's own life; a secret act; going out for personal reasons; sneaking out.
{{der-bottom}}

===Pronunciation===
{{ja-pron|わたし|acc=h|y=kun}}
{{ja-pron|わたくし|acc=h|y=kun}}
{{ja-pron|あたし|acc=h|y=kun}}

===Pronoun===
{{ja-pos|わたし|pronoun}}
: {{ja-pos|わたくし|pronoun}} ''more formal''
: {{ja-pos|あたし|pronoun}} ''generally only used by women when referring to themselves''

# [[I]] {{gloss|first person pronoun}}
#: {{ja-usex|'''私'''はイギリス人です。|'''わたし''' は イギリス-じん です。|'''I''''m English.}}
#: {{ja-usex|'''私'''は誰ですか。|'''わたし''' は だれ です か。|Who am '''I'''?}}

====Usage notes====
わたし is the usual polite term for referring to oneself; わたくし is formal, and only used in certain circumstances, such as by TV announcers or public figures such as politicians. Conversely, it is too formal for casual conversation for men, where terms like [[俺]] (for men) are preferred.
{{Japanese first-person pronouns}}

====See also====
* {{ja-r|俺|おれ}}
* {{ja-r|小生|しょうせい}}
* {{ja-r|小職|しょうしょく}}
* {{ja-r|朕|ちん}}
* {{ja-r|僕|ぼく}}: I (generally used by males)
* {{ja-r|余|よ}}
* {{ja-r|我|われ}}
* {{ja-r|儂|わし}}

[[Category:Japanese basic words|わたし]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=사|eumhun=|mr=sa|y=sa}}

# [[private]], [[personal]]

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[tư]], [[tây]]|rs=禾02}}

# [[private]], [[personal]]

[[af:私]]
[[zh-min-nan:私]]
[[be:私]]
[[et:私]]
[[el:私]]
[[fr:私]]
[[ko:私]]
[[it:私]]
[[ky:私]]
[[lo:私]]
[[lb:私]]
[[lt:私]]
[[li:私]]
[[hu:私]]
[[mg:私]]
[[ms:私]]
[[fj:私]]
[[nl:私]]
[[ja:私]]
[[no:私]]
[[pl:私]]
[[pt:私]]
[[ru:私]]
[[fi:私]]
[[sv:私]]
[[th:私]]
[[chr:私]]
[[tr:私]]
[[uk:私]]
[[vi:私]]
[[zh:私]]