{{character info/new}}
{{also|𣎴}}

==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=1|rad=一|as=03|sn=4|four=10900|canj=MF|ids=⿱丆卜}}

====Derived characters====
*{{lang|mul|[[丕]] [[否]] [[抔]] [[坏]] [[罘]] [[杯]]}}

====Descendants====
* [[ふ]]
* [[フ]]

===References===
* {{Han ref|kx=0076.150|dkj=00019|dj=0149.040|hdz=10011.060|uh=4E0D|ud=19981|bh=A4A3|bd=42147}}

[[Category:Han characters from which hiragana were derived|ふ]]
[[Category:Han characters from which katakana were derived|フ]]

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etyl}}

{{liushu|p}}.

The character {{lang|zh|不}} originated as a pictograph of the [[calyx]] of a flower. It was then composed into a phono-semantic character with the pictograph for mouth ({{zh-l|*口}}), to form {{och-l|否}}, representing “no” (negation). This composed meaning then spread back to the original character {{lang|zh|不}}, making it a synonym of {{lang|zh|否}}. A new character of {{och-l|柎}} was eventually created to represent the original meaning of calyx.

[[w:Bernhard_Karlgren|Karlgren]] and [[w:Léon_Wieger|Wieger]] interpret it as a bird flying toward the sky ({{zh-l|*一}}). The sky being the limit for the bird, thus the idea of negation.

===Etymology===
Old Chinese had two sets of negatives: the initial *''p''-series and the initial *''m''-series. {{lang|zh|不}} is the prototype of the *''p''-series of negatives. Although it is the usual Literary Chinese negative attested from the [[oracle bone script]] down, its current usage is now confined to Mandarin dialects. In the oracle bone inscriptions, a total of five negative particles can be found: {{och-l|*不}}, {{och-l|*弗}}, {{och-l|*毋}}, {{och-l|*勿}} and {{och-l|*非}}. With the exception of {{och-l|*非}} (discussed later), the remaining can be neatly organised into the following system:

{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"
! !! *''-V'' !! *''-ɯd''
|-
! *''p-''type negatives (< ?)
| {{och-l|不}} || {{och-l|弗}}
|-
! *''m-''type negatives (< {{cog|sit-pro|*ma}})
| {{och-l|毋}}<br>({{och-l|無}}) || {{och-l|勿}}
|}

{{zh-ref|Takahashi (1996)}} argued that the *''m-''type negatives are modal (i.e. negative verbs which are thought of as controllable by the {{w|Shang Dynasty|Shang}}), whereas the *''p-''type negatives are non-modal (imply uncontrollability; actions which are beyond the control of living persons).

In the *''p''-series, {{lang|zh|不}} usually goes with intransitive verbs in the oracle bone script, and {{och-l|弗}} with transitive ones, although there are some glaring exceptions. Little or no pattern can be discerned in the *''m-''type category. {{zh-ref|Takahashi (1996)}} also proposed that the difference between the two vowel series was whether they preceded “stative, eventive, passive” (*''-V'' series) or “non-stative, non-eventive, active” (*''-ɯd'' series) verbs.

It is possible that the two parallel series of negatives in Old Chinese represent a fusion of the common Sino–Tibetan {{m|sit-pro|*ma||no, not}} (carried by the eastward-migrating early Sino–Tibetans) and an indigenous negation system in Central China, and that the merger had been complete by the {{w|Shang Dynasty|Shang}} times. Compare a similar system in Proto-Tai: {{m|tai-pro|*ɓawᴮ||not [strong form 1]}}, {{m|tai-pro|*boːᴮ||not [strong form 2]}}, {{m|tai-pro|*miːᴬ||not [weak form]}}; {{cog|th|บ่||(''literary, archaic, dialectal'') not}}.

In developing from Middle Chinese to Mandarin, this word escaped from regular sound changes to yield its modern pronunciation of ''bù'', owing to itself belonging to the popular stratum. The expected reading is ''fǒu'', with labiodentalisation, now represented by its unaffected Middle Chinese homophone {{zh-l|*否|not}}. The development from Old Chinese to Middle Chinese was not regular either; the variant Middle Chinese readings with [[checked]] coda (''–t'') were an innovation not found in Old Chinese. Another example of high-frequency words escaping regular sound changes is {{och-l|父|dad}}, which resulted in a late coinage of {{zh-l|爸}}.

{{lang|zh|不}} is cognate with other negation particles in the *''p-''type category:

* {{och-l|弗|not}};
* {{och-l|非|tr=*pɯj|not be; not}} – can be safely regarded as a fusion of {{och-l|不|not}} and {{och-l|惟|to be}};
* {{och-l|否|not; to be wrong}};
* {{och-l|匪|tr=*pɯjʔ|it is not; to be not}}; and
* {{och-l|棐|tr=*pɯjʔ|it is not; to be not}}.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=bù
|m_note=Pronunciation changes to ''bú'' when followed by fourth-tone syllables (e.g. {{zh-l|*不是}})
|m-s=bu2
|c=bat1
|h=pfs=put
|md=bók
|mn=put
|mn-t=bug4
|w=4peq
|mc=1+2+3+4
|oc=1,1+2+3
|ma=y
|cat=adv,part
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[not]] {{gloss|preceding verbs and adjectives}}
#: {{zh-x|這個 不 好。|This is '''not''' good.}}
#: {{zh-x|他 不 愛 你。|He does '''not''' love you.}}
# [[no]] {{gloss|answer to a yes-no question}}
#: {{zh-x|你 是 日本人 嗎？'''不'''，我 不是。|Are you Japanese? '''No''', I'm not.}}
# {{n-g|Used with {{zh-l|就}} to indicate the first of two alternatives.}}
#: {{zh-x|他 每天 不是 上班，就是 去 做 義工，一點兒{r} 休息 的 時間 都 沒有。|Everyday, he '''either''' goes to work or volunteers, not leaving any time for rest.}}
# {{lb|zh|colloquial}} {{n-g|Question particle placed at the end of the sentence.}}
# {{lb|zh|colloquial}} {{n-g|Intensifying particle often used with {{zh-l|好}}.}}
# {{lb|zh|archaic}} {{n-g|Meaningless particle used in poems and other texts.}}

=====Synonyms=====
{{zh-dial}}

=====Usage notes=====
{{hide box|Usage notes for Mandarin|align=left|
* The tone changes from fourth to second tone when followed by a fourth-tone syllable.
* When negating the verb {{zh-l|有}} (to have), {{zh-l|沒}} is used instead of {{lang|zh|不}} (i.e. {{zh-l|沒有}}, rather than *{{lang|zh|不有}}).
* The word '''no''' does not have a translation in Chinese. To answer "no" to a yes/no question (either "affirmative-negative questions" ({{zh-l|正反問句}}) or a {{zh-l|嗎}} question), you have to use the verb of the question in negative form, i.e. preceded by '''{{lang|zh|不}}''' (or by {{zh-l|沒}} in the case of {{zh-l|有}}).
*: {{zh-x|你 認識 他 嗎？不 認識。|Do you know him? '''No'''.}}
*: {{zh-x|你 認 不 認識 他？不 認識。|Do you know ['''not''' know] him? '''No'''.}}
** If there is no verb to negate in the context, {{zh-l|不是}} is used.
** "No" can be translated by {{zh-l|否}} alone, but this is formal and not normally used in standard Chinese.
** When a verb is two characters long, truncating it to the first character before {{lang|zh|不}} may sound more natural, as in the example above ({{l|zh|'''[[認]]'''不'''[[認識]]'''[[他]]／'''[[认]]'''不'''[[认识]]'''[[他]]}} as opposed to {{l|zh|'''[[認識]]'''不'''[[認識]]'''[[他]]／'''[[认识]]'''不'''[[认识]]'''[[他]]}})
* 不 is similar to a verb prefix that forms a '''stative verb''' with the verb to be negated. Therefore the predicates of the {{lang|zh|不}} sentences that contain the new compound verbs can not be modified by the perfective aspect marker {{zh-l|了}}, which modifies only '''dynamic verbs'''.
*: {{zh-x|我 不 當兵 了。|I am '''no''' longer a soldier.}}
** When {{lang|zh|了}} appears in a {{lang|zh|不}} sentence, it usually functions as a marker of "currently relevant state" instead. See the sentence above and notice that it does not mean "I have not become a soldier".
}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=fǒu
|c=fau2
|mn-t=houn2
|mc=2
|cat=part
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|archaic}} {{zh-alt-form|否|''negation and question particle''}}

===Pronunciation 3===
{{zh-pron
|m=fōu
|c=
|mc=1
|oc=1
|cat=pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{surname|lang=zh}}

===Pronunciation 4===
{{zh-pron
|m=fū
|c=
|cat=adv,part
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{lb|zh|archaic}} [[calyx]]

===Compounds===
{{zh-der|不礙事|不安|不比|不必|不辭|不辭而別|不錯|不丹|不單|不但|不當|不得不|不得了|不點兒|不斷|不對|不顧|不管|不光|不好|不堪|不可|不愧|不力|不利|不良|不了|不料|不列顛|不劣方頭|不吝|不論|不滿|不免|不能|不平|不巧|不然|不仁|不忍|不如|不少|不是|不惜|不像話|不興|不行|不省人事|不幸|不許|不揚|不要|不要緊|不一定|不一而足|不一會兒|不用|不由得|不再|不在|不在乎|不怎麼樣|不知不覺|不足|不入虎穴，焉得虎子|不塞不流，不止不行|不止|不孝|不詳|不治|不全|不善|不祥|不惑|不大|不妨|不宜|不容|不得|不成|不捨|不敢}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=4|rs=一03}}

# [[not]], [[non-]], [[un-]]

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=[[ふ]] (fu), [[ほち]] (hochi)
|kanon=[[ふう]] (fū), [[ふつ]] (futsu)
|kanyoon=[[ぶ]] (bu)
|kun=[[せず]] (sezu), [[にあらず]] (niarazu), [[いなや]] (inaya)
}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top3|Compounds}}
* {{ja-r|不安|ふあん}}
* {{ja-r|不一|ふいつ}}, {{ja-r|不乙|ふいつ}}
* {{ja-r|不運|ふ.うん}}
* {{ja-r|不壊|ふかい}}
* {{ja-r|不易|ふえき}}
* {{ja-r|不可|ふか}}
* {{ja-r|不可解|ふかかい}}
* {{ja-r|不快|ふかい}}
* {{ja-r|不許|ふきょ}}: not [[permitting]]
* {{ja-r|不具|ふぐ}}
* {{ja-r|不倶戴天|ふぐたいてん}}
* {{ja-r|不言実行|ふげんじっこう}}
* {{ja-r|不孝|ふこう}}
* {{ja-r|不幸|ふこう}}
* {{ja-r|不治|ふじ}}
* {{ja-r|不死身|ふじみ}}
* {{ja-r|不悉|ふしつ}}
* {{ja-r|不肖|ふしょう}}
* {{ja-r|不祥|ふしょう}}
{{der-mid3}}
* {{ja-r|不詳|ふしょう}}
* {{ja-r|不祥事|ふしょうじ}}
* {{ja-r|不浄|ふじょう}}
* {{ja-r|不精|ぶしょう}}
* {{ja-r|不尽|ふじん}}
* {{ja-r|不宣|ふせん}}
* {{ja-r|不戦|ふせん}}
* {{ja-r|不全|ふぜん}}
* {{ja-r|不善|ふぜん}}
* {{ja-r|不測|ふそく}}
* {{ja-r|不足|ふそく}}
* {{ja-r|不定|ふてい}}
* {{ja-r|不貞|ふてい}}
* {{ja-r|不逞|ふてい}}
* {{ja-r|不敵|ふてき}}
* {{ja-r|不当|ふとう}}
* {{ja-r|不凍|ふとう}}: [[nonfreezing]]
* {{ja-r|不備|ふび}}
* {{ja-r|不敏|ふびん}}
* {{ja-r|不憫|ふびん}}, {{ja-r|不愍|ふびん}}, {{ja-r|不便|ふびん}}
{{der-mid3}}
* {{ja-r|不服|ふふく}}
* {{ja-r|不文律|ふぶんりつ}}
* {{ja-r|不平|ふへい}}
* {{ja-r|不変|ふへん}}
* {{ja-r|不満|ふまん}}
* {{ja-r|不毛|ふもう}}
* {{ja-r|不問|ふもん}}
* {{ja-r|不埒|ふらち}}
* {{ja-r|不慮|ふりょ}}
* {{ja-r|不倫|ふりん}}
* {{ja-r|不老|ふろう}}: [[eternal]] [[youth]]
* {{ja-r|不惑|ふわく}}
* {{ja-r|不束|ふそく}}
* {{ja-r|不思議|ふしぎ}}
* {{ja-r|不知火|しらぬい}}
* {{ja-r|不如帰|ほととぎす}}
* {{ja-r|不見転|みずてん}}
{{der-bottom}}

===Prefix===
{{ja-pos|prefix|ふ}}

# [[un-]], [[non-]], [[in-]]

{{ja-pos|prefix|ぶ}}
# [[un-]], [[non-]], [[in-]]
# [[bad]], [[poor]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[부]], [[불]], [[비]]|rv=bu, bul, bi|mr=pu, pul, pi|y=pwu, pwu, pi|eumhun=[[아닐]], [[아닐]], [[클]]|ehrv=anil, anil, keul|ehmr=anil, anil, k'ǔl|ehy=anil, anil, khul}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=一03}}

===References===
* {{Hanja ref|nav=9606}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[bất]], [[phầu]], [[phủ]], [[phi]], [[bứt]]|rs=一03}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=一03}}

===References===
* Thiều Chửu : Hán Việt Tự Điển Hà Nội 1942
* Trần Văn Chánh: Từ Điển Hán Việt NXB Trẻ, Ho Chi Minh Ville, 1999
* Vũ Văn Kính: Đại Tự Điển Chữ Nôm, NXB Văn Nghệ, Ho Chi Minh Ville, 1999

[[zh-min-nan:不]]
[[cs:不]]
[[da:不]]
[[et:不]]
[[el:不]]
[[fr:不]]
[[ko:不]]
[[id:不]]
[[it:不]]
[[lt:不]]
[[hu:不]]
[[mg:不]]
[[ms:不]]
[[fj:不]]
[[nl:不]]
[[ja:不]]
[[no:不]]
[[uz:不]]
[[pl:不]]
[[pt:不]]
[[ru:不]]
[[fi:不]]
[[sv:不]]
[[ta:不]]
[[th:不]]
[[chr:不]]
[[uk:不]]
[[vi:不]]
[[zh:不]]