{{also|无信不立}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=无信不立}}

===Etymology===
* {{RQ:Confucius}}/[[s:The_Analects#Part_12|Part 12]] ([[:zh:s:論語/顏淵第十二|論語/顏淵第十二]])
*: [[子貢]][[問]]「[[政]]」。[[子]][[曰]]：「[[足食]]，[[足兵]]，[[民]][[信]][[之]][[矣]]。」[[子貢]][[曰]]：「[[必]][[不得已]][[而]][[去]]，[[於]][[斯]][[三]][[者]][[何]][[先]]？」[[曰]]：「[[去]][[兵]]。」[[子貢]][[曰]]：「[[必]][[不得已]][[而]][[去]]，[[於]][[斯]][[二]][[者]][[何]][[先]]？」[[曰]]：「[[去]][[食]]。自古皆有死，民'''無信不立'''。」
*:: ''[[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]] asked about government. The Master said, "The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency of food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the confidence of the people in their ruler." [[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]] said, "If it cannot be helped, and one of these must be dispensed with, which of the three should be foregone first?" "The military equipment," said the Master. [[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]] again asked, "If it cannot be helped, and one of the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should be foregone?" The Master answered, "Part with the food. From of old, death has been the lot of all men; but if the people '''have no faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state'''." ([[w:James Legge|Legge]])
* ''c.'' '''1330 - 1400:''' [[w:Luo Guanzhong|Luo Guanzhong]], ''[[s:Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 11#11|Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 11]]''
*: [[自古]][[皆]][[有]][[死]]，[[人]]'''無信不立'''
*:: ''From of old, death has been the lot of all men; but if people '''have no faith in a person, there is no standing for that person'''''.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=wúxìn不lì
|cat=prov
}}

===Proverb===
{{zh-proverb}}

# If people have no faith in a person, there is no standing for that person.

====Related terms====
* {{l|zh|自古皆有死，民無信不立}}
* {{l|zh|自古皆有死，人無信不立}}