==Chinese==
{{was fwotd|2014|November|5|lang=zh}}
{{zh-forms}}
{{wikipedia|lang=zh}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=yǔzhòu
|c=jyu5 zau6
|h=pfs=yî-chhiu
|md=ṳ̄-dêu
|mn=qz:ú-tiǔ/tw,xm:ú-tiū/zz:í-tiū
|w=3hhy zeu
|ma=Zh-yuzhòu.ogg
|mc=y
|oc=y
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# [[universe]]; [[cosmos]]; [[macrocosm]]; [[space]]
# [[roof]], [[ridgepole]] and [[beam]]s (of a house)
#* {{zh-x|而 燕雀 佼 之，以為 不能 與 之 爭 於 '''宇宙''' 之間。|And the swallows and sparrows are complacent, thinking that (the phoenix) cannot compete with them near the '''roof, ridgepole and beams of a house'''.|CL|ref=Hanfeizi}}
# [[heaven]] and [[earth]]; {{w|all under heaven}}; [[country]]
# (''infinite'') [[space]] and [[time]]
#* {{zh-x|舜 以 天下 讓 ^善卷，^善卷 曰：「余 立 於 '''宇宙''' 之 中，冬 日 衣 皮毛，夏 日 衣 葛絺；春 耕種{zhòng}，形 足 以 勞動；秋 收斂，身 足 以 休息；日 出 而 作，日 入 而 息，逍遙 於 天地 之間 而 心意 自得。吾 何以 天下 為{wéi} 哉？悲 夫！子 之 不 知 余 也！」遂 不 受。於是 去 而 入 深山，莫 知 其 處。|Shun proposed to resign the throne to Shan Juan, who said, 'I am a unit in the midst of '''space and time'''. In winter I wear skins and furs; in summer, grass-cloth and linen; in spring I plough and sow, my strength being equal to the toil; in autumn I gather in my harvest, and am prepared to cease from labour and eat. At sunrise I get up and work; at sunset I rest. So do I enjoy myself between heaven and earth, and my mind is content: why should I have anything to do with the throne? Alas! that you, Sir, do not know me better!' Thereupon he declined the proffer, and went away, deep among the hills, no man knew where.|CL|ref=Zhuangzi}}

====Derived terms====
{{zh-der|多元宇宙|宇宙論|宇宙大爆炸|小宇宙|宇宙火箭|宇宙飛船|宇宙航行|宇宙通信|宇宙速度|宇宙觀|宇宙空間|宇宙學|宇宙塵|宇宙射線|宇宙年|宇宙站|宇宙線|宇宙鋒|封閉宇宙學說|島宇宙|膨脹宇宙|開放宇宙學說}}

===Descendants===
{{CJKV|宇宙|うちゅう|우주|vũ trụ}}

{{zh-cat|Intermediate|Astronomy}}

----

==Japanese==
{{ja-kanjitab|う|ちゅう|yomi=o}}

===Noun===
{{ja-noun|うちゅう}}

# [[outer space]]
# [[universe]], [[cosmos]]

====Compounds====
{{rel-top|Compounds}}
* [[小宇宙]] ([[しょううちゅう]], shōuchū): [[microcosm]]
* [[大宇宙]] ([[だいうちゅう]], daiuchū): [[macrocosm]]
* [[深宇宙]]
* [[宇宙ゴミ]]
* [[宇宙ステーション]]
* [[宇宙基地]]
* [[宇宙ロケット]]
* [[宇宙医学]]
* [[宇宙科学]]
* [[宇宙開発]]
* [[宇宙開闢]]
* [[宇宙学]]
* [[宇宙観]]
* [[宇宙空間]]
* [[宇宙原理]]
* [[宇宙公害]]
* [[宇宙工学]]
* [[航空宇宙産業]]
* [[宇宙産業]]
* [[宇宙食]]
* [[宇宙進化論]]
* [[宇宙人]]
* [[宇宙塵]]
* [[宇宙線]]
* [[宇宙船]]
{{rel-mid}}
* [[宇宙速度]]
* [[宇宙大爆発]]
* [[宇宙探査]]
* [[宇宙中継]]
* [[宇宙通信]]
* [[宇宙定数]]
* [[宇宙電波]]
* [[宇宙背景放射]]
* [[宇宙博]]
* [[宇宙発生論]]
* [[宇宙飛行]]
* [[宇宙病]]
* [[宇宙服]]
* [[宇宙物理]]
* [[宇宙兵器]]
* [[宇宙法]]
* [[宇宙帽]]
* [[宇宙遊泳]]
* [[宇宙酔い]]
* [[宇宙旅行]]
* [[宇宙論]]
* [[航空宇宙技術研究所]]
* [[アメリカ航空宇宙局]]
* [[米航空宇宙局]]
* [[宇宙航空研究開発機構]]
{{rel-bottom}}

====Synonyms====
* {{ja-r|天地|てんち}}: [[heaven]] and [[earth]]
* {{ja-r|自然|しぜん}}: [[nature]]
* {{ja-r|世界|せかい}}: the [[world]]
* {{ja-r|万象|ばんしょう}}: all things, all of the universe, every [[manifestation]] of [[nature]]
* {{ja-r|万物|ばんぶつ}}: all things, all of the universe, every manifestation of nature

===Proper noun===
{{ja-pos|proper|ひろし}}

# {{given name|male|lang=ja}}

[[Category:Japanese male given names|ひろし]]
[[Category:ja:Astronomy|うちゆう]]

----

==Korean==
{{ko-hanjatab}}

===Noun===
{{ko-noun|hj|hangeul=우주}}

# {{hanja form of|우주|[[outer space]]; [[universe]]; [[cosmos]]}}

----

==Vietnamese==
{{vi-hantutab}}

===Noun===
{{vi-hantu}}

# {{han tu form of|vũ trụ|[[outer space]]; [[universe]]; [[cosmos]]}}

[[zh-min-nan:宇宙]]
[[cs:宇宙]]
[[et:宇宙]]
[[fr:宇宙]]
[[ko:宇宙]]
[[it:宇宙]]
[[lo:宇宙]]
[[lt:宇宙]]
[[li:宇宙]]
[[hu:宇宙]]
[[mg:宇宙]]
[[nl:宇宙]]
[[ja:宇宙]]
[[pl:宇宙]]
[[ru:宇宙]]
[[fi:宇宙]]
[[sv:宇宙]]
[[chr:宇宙]]
[[uk:宇宙]]
[[vi:宇宙]]
[[zh:宇宙]]