{{also|不得其门而入}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=不得其门而入}}

===Etymology===
* {{RQ:Confucius}}
*: [[叔孫武叔]][[語]][[大夫]][[於]][[朝]]，[[曰]]：“[[子貢]][[賢]][[於]][[仲尼]]。”[[子服景伯]][[以]][[告]][[子貢]]。[[子貢]][[曰]]：“[[譬]][[之]][[宮]][[牆]]，[[賜]][[之]][[牆]][[也]][[及]][[肩]]，[[窺見]][[室]][[家]][[之]][[好]]。[[夫子]][[之]][[牆]][[數]][[仞]]，'''不得其門而入'''，[[不]][[見]][[宗廟]][[之]][[美]]，[[百]][[官]][[之]][[富]]。[[得]][[其]][[門]][[者]][[或]][[寡]][[矣]]。[[夫子]][[之]][[云]]，[[不]][[亦]][[宜]][[乎]]！”
*:: ''(The high official) Shusun Wushu remarked to the other officials at court, "[[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]] surpasses his master (Confucius) in ability." Zifu Jingbo reported this to [[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]]. [[w:Disciples_of_Confucius#Zi-gong|Zigong]] said, "I will use the analogy of a wall; the wall that I have built comes up to my shoulders. One can get a glimpse of the beauty inside my house. My master's wall is very high; if you are '''unable to enter through the gate''', you will not behold the beauty of the ancestral temple or the splendor of all the officers inside. I suspect that few people are able to enter through the gate. Are not then Shusun Wushu's words reasonable?'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=不 dé qí mén ér rù
|cat=id
}}

===Idiom===
{{zh-idiom}}
# to not have an "in"; unable to crack into (a market); to try to find an in without any success; to be unable to gain entrance
#* '''2005:''' Design News China editorial staff, ''[http://www.designnews.com.cn/Article/html/2005-11%5C20051122134853.htm 争议英特尔称AMD旧技术援华]'' (Dispute ... [[Intel]] claims that old [[AMD]] technology is helping China)
#*: [[在]][[經歷]][[了]][[多年]][[的]]'''不得其門而入'''[[後]]，[[中國]][[終於]][[在]]2005[[年]]10[[月]]24[[日]][[正式]][[成為]]“X86[[體系]][[俱樂部]]”[[的]][[正式]][[成員]]。
#*:: ''On 24 October 2005, after having spent many years of '''trying to find an "in" without any success''', China finally became a formal member of the "[[w:X86 architecture|X86 architecture]] club."''
#* '''undated:''' China National Cotton editorial staff ''[http://www.cncotton.com.cn/cottonschool/class_detail.asp?id=352 中国企业信息化道路]'' (Information Super Highway for Chinese Industries)
#*: [[因此]]，[[若]][[你]][[所]][[安裝]][[或]][[開放]][[的]][[功能]]、[[網路]][[服務]][[與]][[通訊]][[連接埠]][[越]][[少]]，[[駭客]][[就]][[越]]'''不得其門而入'''。
#*:: ''Because of this, the fewer capabilities/network services and communications connection ports that you install or open, the more that hackers will be '''unable to gain entrance''' (to your system).''