{{character info/new}}
{{also|风|虱}}
==Translingual==
{{stroke order|type=animate}}

===Han character===
{{Han char|rn=182|rad=風|as=00|sn=9|four=77210|canj=HNHLI,HNMLI|ids=⿵𠘨䖝}}
#{{mul-kangxi radical-def}}
====Derived characters====
* [[Index:Chinese radical/風]]
* [[楓]], [[諷]], [[葻]], [[颿]], [[瘋]]

====References====
* {{Han ref|kx=1411.010|dkj=43756|dj=1930.200|hdz=74480.010|uh=98A8|ud=39080|bh=ADB7|bd=44471}}

----

==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=风}}

===Glyph origin===
{{Han etyl}}
{{Han compound|凡|虫|t2=insects|ls=psc|c1=p|c2=s}}. Ancient Chinese thought insects appear with wind. (Insects refer to any kind of animal, such as tigers ({{zh-l|*大蟲}})). The stroke inside the enclosure has merged with the {{lang|zh|虫}}, so compound is graphically {{Han compound|几|䖝}}; compare similar development in {{zh-l|*鳳}} (from {{zh-l|*鳥}}).

===Etymology===
{{unk.|lang=zh}}. Pronunciations 1 and 2 are cognate, and pronunciation 3 appears to be cognate as well. The Old Chinese form for "wind" was *''prəm'', which is thought to be related to {{cog|tai-pro|*C̬.lɯmᴬ||wind}}, {{cog|ko|바람||wind}} and {{cog|bo|རླུང||wind}}. This word has a wide range of extended meanings, and interestingly many of these have exact parallels in the Korean cognate. Compare Chinese {{zh-l|*風流}}, {{zh-l|*風騷}} - Korean {{m|ko|바람둥이}}.

Cognate with:
* {{och-l|飛廉|wind god}}
* {{och-l|蜚蠊|cockroach}} (note the preservation of the ''-r-'' infix in Old Chinese through disyllabification, also {{och-l|嵐}}, {{och-l|葻}})
* {{och-l|瘋|mad, insane}}
* {{och-l|諷|to mock, to advise}}
* {{och-l|帆|sail}}

The development from Old Chinese to Middle Chinese was irregular, driven by {{w|dissimilation}} of the initial and coda bilabial consonants.

===Pronunciation 1===
{{zh-pron
|m=fēng,er=y
|c=fung1
|h=pfs=fûng
|j=feng1
|md=hŭng
|mn=hong/qz:hoang
|mn_note=Quanzhou: hoang - vernacular; hong - literary
|mn-t=huang1/hong1
|mn-t_note=huang1 - vernacular; hong1 - literary
|w=1fon
|mc=1
|oc=1
|ma=y
|cat=n,pn
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# [[wind]]
#* {{zh-x|風雨|wind and rain; hardships}}
#* {{zh-x|狂風|gale}}
#* {{zh-x|風水|[[feng shui]]}}
#* {{zh-x|蘀 兮 蘀 兮，風 其 吹 女。叔 兮 伯 兮，倡 予 和 女。|Ye withered leaves! Ye withered leaves! How the '''wind''' is blowing you away! O ye uncles, Give us the first note, and we will join in with you.|CL|ref=Shijing}}
#* {{zh-x|寢 不 尸，居 不 容。見 齊 衰 者，雖 狎，必 變。見 冕 者 與 瞽 者，雖 褻，必 以 貌。凶 服 者 式 之。式 負 版 者。有 盛饌，必 變 色 而 作。迅雷 '''風'''烈，必 變。|In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. At home, he did not put on any formal deportment. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it might be an acquaintance, he would change countenance; when he saw any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person, though he might be in his undress, he would salute him in a ceremonious manner. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the crossbar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one bearing the tables of population. When he was at an entertainment where there was an abundance of provisions set before him, he would change countenance and rise up. On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent '''wind''', he would change countenance.|CL|ref=Analects}}
# {{†}} [[air]]; [[atmosphere]]
# {{†}} [[general]] [[mood]]; [[custom]]
#* {{zh-x|風俗|customs}}
#* {{zh-x|風氣|common practice; atmosphere}}
#* {{zh-x|王 曰：「嗚呼！說，四海 之 內，咸 仰 朕 德，時 乃 風。股肱 惟 人，良 臣 惟 聖。」|The king said, "Oh! Yue, that '''all''' within the four seas look up to my virtue is owing to you. As his legs and arms form the man, so does a good minister form the sage (king)."|CL|ref=Shujing}}
# {{†}} [[demeanour]]
#* {{zh-x|風範|manner}}
#* {{zh-x|風度|elegance}}
# {{†}} [[cultivation]]; [[moralisation]]
#* {{zh-x|風教|cultivation}}
# [[style]]; [[manner]]
#* {{zh-x|風格|style}}
#* {{zh-x|文風|writing style}}
# {{†}} [[conduct]]; [[discipline]]
#* {{zh-x|風惠|favour}}
#* {{zh-x|風紀|standard of behaviour}}
# {{†}} [[power]]
#* {{zh-x|風掃|to sweep}}
# {{†}} [[news]]; [[information]]
#* {{zh-x|風聲|news}}
#* {{zh-x|風訊|news}}
#* {{zh-x|聞風而動|to act at once on hearing the news}}
# {{†}} [[love]]; [[affection]]; to become [[sexually]] attracted; to [[copulate]]
#* {{zh-x|風月|romance}}
#* {{zh-x|風情|amorous feelings}}
#* {{zh-x|風馬牛不相及|irrelevant}}
#* {{zh-x|馬 牛 其 '''風'''，臣妾 逋逃，勿 敢 越 逐，祗 復 之，我 商 賚 汝。乃 越 逐 不 復，汝 則 有 常刑！無敢 寇攘，逾 垣牆，竊 馬 牛，誘 臣妾，汝 則 有 常刑！|When the horses or cattle are '''seeking one another''', or when your followers, male or female, abscond, presume not to leave the ranks to pursue them. But let them be carefully returned. I will reward you (among the people) who return them according to their value. But if you leave your places to pursue them, or if you who find them do not restore them, you shall be dealt with according to the regular punishments. And let none of you presume to commit any robbery or detain any creature that comes in your way, to jump over enclosures and walls to steal (people's) horses or oxen, or to decoy away their servants or female attendants. If you do so, you shall be dealt with according to the regular punishments.|CL|ref=Shujing}}
# {{†}} [[dissolute]]; [[promiscuous]]
#* {{zh-x|風流|dissolute}}
#* {{zh-x|風騷|flirtatious behaviour}}
# {{†}} [[ungrounded]]; [[baseless]]
#* {{zh-x|風言|rumour}}
#* {{zh-x|風謠|ballad song}}
# {{†}} {{zh-alt-form|瘋|[[mad]]; [[insane]]}}
#* {{zh-x|風發|spirited}}
#* {{zh-x|風病|psychiatric illness}}
# {{†}} {{lb|zh|TCM}} {{n-g|One of the causes of diseases in [[traditional Chinese medicine]].}}
#* {{zh-x|中風|stroke}}
#* {{zh-x|風寒|wind chill}}
#* {{zh-x|風濕|rheumatic}}
#* {{zh-x|痛風|gout}}
# {{†}} [[epilepsy]]
#* {{zh-x|風癡|insanity}}
#* {{zh-x|風眩|epilepsy}}
# {{surname|lang=zh}} [[Feng]]; [[Fung]]

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|大風|風雹|風暴|風暴潮|風標|風波|風伯|風不吹，樹不搖|風不怕，雨不怕|風采|風餐露宿|風操|風鏟|風潮|風車|風塵|風塵僕僕|風馳電掣|風傳|風吹草動|風吹日曬|風吹雨打|風擋|風刀霜劍|風笛|風度|風發|風範|風風火火|風乾|風格|風骨|風光|風害|風寒|風耗|風和日麗|風花雪月|風華|風化|風火牆|風級|風紀|風節|風景|風景畫|風景區|風鏡|風捲殘雲|風口|風快|風浪|風雷|風力|風涼|風涼話|風流|風爐|風帽|風貌|風能|風鳥|風氣|風琴|風情|風趣|風騷|風色|風沙|風扇|風尚|風神|風聲|風師|風蝕|風勢|風霜|風水|風俗|風速|風濤|風味|風習|風險|風向|風行|風雪|風雅|風衣|風雨|風雨飄搖|風雨如晦|風雨如磐|風月|風雲|風韻|風箏|風致|風姿|颱風|風颱|學風|商風|勁風|刁風|幼風|反風|威風|和風|凌風|下風|光風|國風|家風|悲風|厲風|吹風|傷風|可風|惡風|恆風|北風|南風|心風|德風|微風|宗風|御風|從風|山風|惠風|季風|希風|中風|冬風|土風|信風|屏風|妖風|刮風|凱風|寒風|八風|上風|協風|失風|冒風|世風|培風|囂風|兜風|喝風|喉風|回風|向風|古風|口風|徐風|匪風|冷風|作風|剛風|海風|暄風|玄風|穀風|涼風|狂風|政風|牌風|擋風|手風|把風|拉風|烈風|撇風|旋風|整風|扶風|搶風|摶風|漲風|暴風|淳風|湯風|疾風|放風|景風|松風|接風|看風|相風|校風|秋風|正風|瘢風|搬風|知風|眇風|省風|撮風|盲風|盪風|窩風|搧風|晨風|發風|畫風|披風|朔風|男風|淫風|搖風|暖風|曉風|油風|爭風|熛風|熏風|瀑風|成風|民風|搐風|清風|歐風|搏風|流風|漏風|條風|泠風|淒風|歪風|牙風|梅風|東風|晚風|春風|焚風|望風|文風|祛風|痛風|揚風|招風|風災|風戽|飆風|風語|順風|長風|谷風|迅風|雄風|風路|閃風|黃風|觀風|終風|風機|臺風|風候|風霾|臍風|雌風|過風|風帆|西風|風圈|見風|變風|風鶴|轉風|興風|采風|風飄|風措|蘋風|風鐸|風馳|風評|義風|風聞|英風|薰風|風概|芳風|風痴|颳風|豳風|防風|選風|風魔|風虔|陰風|翾風|風兒|風火|風謠|風穴|風角|風篷|腥風|鬥風|風厲|風量|高風|著風|鼓風|風熱|風烈|胡風|風燭|麗風|風驅|風阻|風牽|風鑒|風浴|巡風|風子|風物|風鼓|驚風|驅風|風疹|風領|頭風|風藥|餘風|風病|風雞|風磨|罡風|逆風|飄風|素風|颶風|風頭|風響|風靜|風霆|風障|風門|風鈴|風邪|風邁|風起|風調|風言|風蝶|風草|風義|風簷|風痺|風疾|風燈|風猷|風煙|風潑|風源|風洞|風汛|風欠|風望|風日|風斗|風教|風憲|風態|風息|風從|風家|風姨|風壓|風團|風后|風動|風剪|風儀|風土|風信|風什|風人|顛風|頹風|闌風|頂風|跳風|詩風|風高|臨風|風羊|露風|風肉|風靡|陸風|陣風|閶風|閬風|開風|鄉風|門風|遺風|通風|金風|邶風|綑風|透風|風姓|迴風|迎風|關風|贔風|輕風|衝風|緒風|起風|走風|賭風|聞風|結風|話風|風癱|風箱|飛風|風話|肝風}}

====Descendants====
{{CJKV||ふう|풍|phong}}

===Pronunciation 2===
{{zh-pron
|m=fèng
|c=fung3
|mc=2
|oc=2
|dial=n
|cat=v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} to [[blow]]; to [[fan]]
# {{†}} to [[influence]]; to [[reform]] a misguided person through [[persuasion]]
#* {{zh-x|風民|to cultivate the masses}}

====Compounds====
{{zh-der|fold=1|風世勵俗|風示|風議}}

===Pronunciation 3===
{{zh-pron
|m=fěng
|c=fung3
|dial=n
|cat=v
}}

====Definitions====
{{zh-hanzi}}

# {{†}} {{zh-alt-form|諷|to [[mock]]; to [[ridicule]]; to [[satire]]}}
# {{†}} {{zh-alt-form|諷|to [[advise]] in mild tone}}
#* {{zh-x|風勸|to advise}}
#* {{zh-x|風諭|to advise in mild tone}}

{{zh-cat|Beginning|Weather}}

----

==Japanese==

===Kanji===
{{ja-kanji|grade=2|rs=風00}}

====Readings====
{{ja-readings
|goon=[[ふう]] (fū), [[ふ]] (fu)
|kanon=[[ほう]] (hō)
|kun=[[かぜ]] (kaze), [[かざ]] (kaza)
|nanori=[[か]] (ka)}}

====Compounds====
{{der-top}}
{{top4}}
* {{ja-r|風棘|ふうきょく}}: [[tuberculous dactylitis]]
* [[風圧]]
* [[風雲]]
* [[風化]]
* [[風害]]
* [[風紀]]
* [[風景]]
{{mid4}}
* [[風月]]
* [[風車]]
* [[風習]]
* [[風塵]]
* [[風雪]]
* [[風俗]]
{{mid4}}
* [[風袋]]
* [[風潮]]
* [[風体]]
* [[風土]]
* [[風物]]
* [[風味]]
{{mid4}}
* [[風流]]
* [[風邪]]
* [[風呂]]
* [[風見鶏]]
* [[神風]]
{{bottom}}
{{der-bottom}}

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|かぜ|yomi=k}}

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|かぜ|acc=0|acc_ref=DJR,NHK}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|かぜ}}

# a movement of air; a [[wind]]
# [[airs]]
# style

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|ふう|yomi=o}}
From {{etyl|ltc|ja|sort=ふう}} {{m|zh|風|tr=pjuwng||wind}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|ふう|acc=1|acc_ref=DJR,NHK}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ふう}}

# [[style]]

===Etymology 3===
{{ja-kanjitab|ふり|yomi=irr}}
The {{m|ja|連用形|tr=ren'yōkei||continuative or stem form}} of verb {{m|ja|振る|tr=furu||to swing}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=irr|ふり|acc=0|acc_ref=DJR,NHK|acc2=2|acc2_ref=DJR,NHK}}

====Alternative forms====
* {{ja-l|振り}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ふり}}

# [[swing]]

===References===
<references/>

[[Category:Japanese basic words|かぜ]]

----

==Korean==

===Hanja===
{{ko-hanja|hangeul=[[풍]]|eumhun=바람|rv=pung|mr=p'ung|y=phung}}

# {{defn|lang=ko|sort=風00}}

----

==Vietnamese==

===Han character===
{{vi-hantu|[[phong]]|rs=風00}}

# {{defn|lang=vi|sort=風00}}

[[Category:CJKV radicals| ]]

[[de:風]]
[[el:風]]
[[eu:風]]
[[fr:風]]
[[ko:風]]
[[hr:風]]
[[it:風]]
[[kn:風]]
[[rw:風]]
[[ku:風]]
[[ky:風]]
[[lo:風]]
[[la:風]]
[[lt:風]]
[[li:風]]
[[hu:風]]
[[mg:風]]
[[ms:風]]
[[fj:風]]
[[nl:風]]
[[ja:風]]
[[pl:風]]
[[pt:風]]
[[ru:風]]
[[sm:風]]
[[fi:風]]
[[sv:風]]
[[th:風]]
[[chr:風]]
[[tr:風]]
[[zh:風]]