==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|alt=阿噣仔,阿斲仔,阿卓仔,阿桌仔,阿斗仔,阿督仔,阿凸仔,阿多仔,阿兜仔|''prefix to names of people''|pointy (nose)|''diminutive suffix''}}

===Etymology===
Refers (by [[synecdoche]]) to the typical pointy nose of Westerners.

Several etymologies have been proposed for ''tok'':
* {{zh-l|*噣}}, {{zh-l|*啄}}: “beak; to peck with a beak” > “beak-like; pointy”. Compare {{cog|en|beak}}.
* {{zh-l|*斲}}: {{lang|zh|《台灣話大詞典》}} proposes that the word is related to a story in ''{{w|Zhuangzi}}'' (“[[s:zh:莊子/徐無鬼|Ghostless Xu]]”, c. 370 to 301 {{B.C.E.}}):
*: {{zh-x|郢 人 堊 慢 其 鼻 端 若 蠅 翼，使 匠人 '''斲''' 之。匠石 運 斤 成 風，聽 而 '''斲''' 之，盡 堊 而 鼻 不 傷，郢 人 立 不 失容。|There was once a man from Ying, and on the tip of his nose was some chalk, no thicker than a fly's wing. He asked a stone-mason to '''slice''' the chalk off. The stone-mason wielded his axe like the wind and '''sliced''' off the chalk following the man's instruction. The chalk was completely removed without injury to the man's nose. The man from Ying just stood there unflinchingly.|CL}}
* {{zh-l|*卓}}: “outstanding; tall”
* {{zh-l|*斗}}: {{lang|zh|《台語正字》}} ({{lang|zh|張清波}}) cites ''{{w|Shiji}}'': {{lang|zh|成山斗入海}}. He claims that {{lang|zh|斗}} means “to protrude” > “pointy”. However, {{lang|zh|斗}} is more likely equivalent to {{zh-l|*陡|steep; precipitous}}.

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|mn=a-tok-仔
|cat=n
}}
{{rfp|lang=cmn|Mandarin}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# {{lb|zh|Min Nan|slang|pejorative}} [[westerner]]; [[Caucasian]]; [[roundeye]] {{zh-mw|個}}
#* {{zh-x|有{Ū} 一 個\e{ê}5{} 歐巴桑 去 美國 𨑨迌\ch{hh}it4{}-tho{ô}5{}，欲 去 便所 的\e{ê}5{} 時，因為 毋\m{m̄}7{} 捌{bat}字，煞 行 入去 查埔\查甫{po͘} 的\e{ê}0{} 彼 間，無外久，一 個\e{ê}5{} '''阿督仔''' 行 入去，隨 擱 闖{chhoàng} 出來，一直 喝{hoah} 講：「I am sorry，I am sorry。」^尾 仔\%a{á}0{}，彼個\彼e{-ê}5{} 阿婆仔 行 出來 氣掇掇\氣c{-c}h{hh}u{ò}a3{}c{c}h{hh}u{ò}a3{} 講：「^夭壽 哦！一 個\e{ê}5{} '''阿督仔''' 真 無 禮貌，行 入來 人 的\e{ê}5{} 便所，猶閣\也{iá}擱 怪 人 門「抑{a̍h} 毋\m{m̄}7{} 鎖 %咧{leh}！」|There was an old granny who went to America on vacation. When it came time for her to go to the restroom, because she was illiterate, she ended up going into the men's room. Before long, a '''roundeye''' walked in, then quickly rushed out as he kept yelling, "I am sorry, I am sorry." Finally, the old lady came out, angrily saying, "Screw him! The '''roundeye''' is very rude. He barged into my bathroom, but he still blamed me, saying the door 'wasn't locked!' (''a̍h m̄ só--leh'', which sounds like "I am sorry")"|TW|ref={{lang|zh|曹麗華}} (ed.), {{lang|zh|笑詼一則----抑m7鎖咧}}}}

====Synonyms====
* {{zh-l|啄鼻仔}}

====Usage notes====
* Usually used in reference to [[westerner]]s. Like most such [[ethnic]] terms, the word is either insulting or neutral depending on who says it, and in what context.

====References====
* {{cite-web
|author=劉建仁
|authorlink=
|date=2011-03-18
|url=https://taiwanlanguage.wordpress.com/2011/03/18/阿督仔（a-tɔk-aˋ）──老外、洋人、老美/
|title=阿督仔（a-tɔk-aˋ）──老外、洋人、老美
|work=台灣話的語源與理據
|language=Chinese
|accessdate=2016-10-27
}}

{{cln|zh|ethnic slurs}}

[[zh-min-nan:阿啄仔]]