{{also|燕雀安知鸿鹄志}}
==Chinese==
{{was fwotd|2017|January|9|lang=zh}}
{{zh-forms|s=燕雀安知鸿鹄志|type=21121}}

===Etymology===
* ''c.'' '''109 BC to 91 {{B.C.E.}}:''' [[w:Sima Qian|Sima Qian]], ''[[w:Records of the Grand Historian|Records of the Grand Historian]]'' ([[:zh:s:史記/卷048|史記/卷048]])
*: [[陳涉]][[少]][[時]]，[[嘗]][[與]][[人]][[傭耕]]，[[輟]][[耕]][[之]][[壟]][[上]]，[[悵恨]][[久之]]，[[曰]]：「[[苟]][[富貴]]，[[無]][[相]][[忘]]。」[[庸]][[者]][[笑]][[而]][[應]][[曰]]：「[[若]][[為]][[庸]][[耕]]，[[何]][[富貴]][[也]]？」[[陳涉]][[太息]][[曰]]：「[[嗟]][[乎]]，'''燕雀安知鴻鵠'''[[之]]'''志'''[[哉]]！」
*:: ''When [[w:Chen Sheng|Chen She]] was young, he worked in the fields with other day laborers. One day, he stopped working and climbed to the top of a hill. He was sullen for quite some time, then said, "If I become rich, I will not forget you all." The other workers laughed, and responded, "You're a day laboror, what riches?" [[w:Chen Sheng|Chen She]] sighed, and said, "Alas, '''how can a little songbird understand the ambitions of a grand swan!''''' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=yànquè ān zhī hónghú zhì
|cat=prov
}}

===Proverb===
{{zh-proverb}}

# How can an ordinary person understand the ambitions of a great person?
#* ''c.'' '''1330 - 1400:''' [[w:Luo Guanzhong|Luo Guanzhong]], ''[[s:Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 4#24|Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 4]]''
#*: [[至]][[夜分]]，[[縣令]][[喚]][[親隨]][[人]][[暗地]][[取]][[出]][[曹操]]，[[且]][[至]][[後院]][[中]][[審]][[究]]；[[問]][[曰]]：「[[我]][[聞]][[丞相]][[待]][[汝]][[不薄]]，[[何故]][[自取其禍]]？」[[操]][[曰]]：「『'''燕雀安知鴻鵠志'''[[哉]]』？[[汝]][[既]][[拏]][[住]][[我]]，[[便當]][[解]][[去]][[請賞]]。[[何必]][[多]][[問]]!」
#*:: ''At midnight, [[w:Chen Gong|the county governor]] ordered his personal aides to discreetly escort [[w:Cao Cao|Cao Cao]] to the rear courtyard for questioning; he asked, "I have heard that [[w:Dong Zhuo|the chancellor]] treats you very well, so why have you brought such trouble upon yourself?" [[w:Cao Cao|Cao]] said, "''''How can a little songbird understand the ambitions of a grand swan'''?' You have captured me, and now you can leisurely turn me over to the authorities and collect your reward. Why ask more questions!"''

===References===
* {{cite-web|url=http://140.111.34.46/newDict/dict/index.html|title=燕雀安知鴻鵠志|work=Guoyu Cidian On-line Mandarin Dictionary</i> (國語辭典)|language=Mandarin|accessdate=2008-02-06}}