{{also|割鸡焉用牛刀}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=割鸡焉用牛刀|type=2112}}

===Etymology===
* {{RQ:Confucius}}/[[s:The_Analects#Part 17|Part 17]] ([[:zh:s:論語/陽貨第十七|論語/陽貨第十七]])
*: [[子]][[之]][[武城]]，[[聞]][[弦歌]][[之]][[聲]]，[[夫子]][[莞爾]][[而]][[笑]]，[[曰]]：「'''割雞焉用牛刀'''。」[[子游]][[對]][[曰]]：「[[昔者]]，[[言偃|偃]][[也]][[聞]][[諸]][[夫子]][[曰]]：『[[君子]][[學道]][[則]][[愛]][[人]]，[[小人]][[學道]][[則]][[易]][[使]][[也]]。』」[[子]][[曰]]：「[[二三子]]！[[言偃|偃]][[之]][[言]][[是]][[也]]，[[前言]][[戲]][[之]][[耳]]！」
*:: ''[[Confucius|The master]] went to [[w:Dezhou|Wucheng]].<ref>Confucius was visiting his disciple [[w:Disciples of Confucius#Yan Yan|Yan Yan]], who was commandant of [[w:Dezhou|Wucheng]] at the time.</ref> When he heard the sound of ritual court music, [[Confucius|the master]] smiled and said, "'''Why use an ox cleaver to kill a chicken?'''"<ref>Confucius was joking with his disciple, suggesting that ritual court music might be a bit [[over the top]], when considering that [[w:Dezhou|Wucheng]] was such a lowly assignment.</ref> [[w:Disciples of Confucius#Yan Yan|Ziyou]] replied, "In that past, I have heard you say, 'If a ruler learns [[w:Tao|the way]], then he will love the people. If a person of low station learns [[w:Tao|the way]], then it will be easier for him to serve.'"<ref>[[w:Disciples of Confucius#Yan Yan|Yan Yan]] is suggesting that even though [[w:Dezhou|Wucheng]] is a small outpost, its civil servants should still be educated in proper court [[etiquette]].</ref> [[Confucius|The master]] said, "Gentlemen! What [[w:Disciples of Confucius#Yan Yan|Yan]] said is correct. As for my previous statement, I was only teasing him!"'' (Wiktionary translation)

<references />

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=gējī yān yòng niúdāo
|cat=prov
}}

===Proverb===
{{zh-proverb}}

# Why use an ox cleaver to kill a chicken?
#: {{zh-x|言 未 絕，呂布 背後 一人，高聲 出 曰：『 '''割雞.焉.用.牛刀'''？』 不勞 溫侯 親往。|[[w:Dong Zhuo|He]] had not yet finished speaking, when a person standing behind [[w:Lü Bu|Lü Bu]] said loudly, "''''Why use an ox cleaver to kill a chicken?'''' We shouldn't trouble [[w:Lü Bu|the ''Marquis of Wen'']] to go personally.|CL|ref=''c.'' '''1330 - 1400:''' [[w:Luo Guanzhong|Luo Guanzhong]], ''[[s:Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 5#15|Romance of the Three Kingdoms/Chapter 5]]''}}

====Synonyms====
* {{zh-l|殺雞焉用牛刀}}

===References===
* {{cite-web|url=http://140.111.34.46/newDict/dict/index.html|title=割雞焉用牛刀|work=Guoyu Cidian On-line Mandarin Dictionary</i> (國語辭典)|language=Mandarin|accessdate=2008-02-28}}

[[zh:割雞焉用牛刀]]