{{also|滥竽充数}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=滥竽充数|type=22}}

===Etymology===
* ''c.'' '''280–233 {{B.C.E.}}: ''' [[w:Han Fei|Han Fei]], ''[[w:Han Feizi (book)|Han Feizi]]/Chapter 30. Inner Assortment of Parables: The Seven Tactics, Part 1'' ([[:zh:s:韓非子#內儲說上七術第三十|《韓非子·內儲說上七術第三十》]])
*: [[齊宣王]][[使]][[人]][[吹]][[竽]]，[[必]][[三]][[百]][[人]]。[[南郭處士]][[請]][[爲]][[王]][[吹]][[竽]]，[[宣王]][[說]][[之]]，[[廩食]][[以]][[數]][[百]][[人]]。[[宣王]][[死]]，[[湣王]][[立]]，[[好]][[一一]][[聽]][[之]]，[[處士]][[逃]]。
*:: ''(Whenever) [[w:Qi_(state)#Replaced_House_of_Jiang|King Xuan]] of [[w:Qi (state)|Qi]] had men play the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]], there had to be 300 men (playing simultaneously). A reclusive scholar, (who was living near the) southern wall of the city,<ref>Because [[南郭]] has multiple meanings, the sentence could also be translated as:
: a. "A reclusive scholar, from a city in the south, asked if he could play the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]] for the king."
: b. "A reclusive scholar, ([[whose]] [[w:Chinese surname|surname]] was) Nanguo, asked if he could play the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]] for the king."</ref> asked if he could play the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]] for the king.<ref>Even though the man couldn't actually play the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]], he figured he could play silently among the 300 men, so that he could receive special treatment by the king.</ref> King Xuan was delighted by this, and dispensed enough food rations for several hundred (musicians). (Then) King Xuan died, and [[w:King Min of Qi|King Min]] took the throne. He preferred to listen to (the [[w:Yu (wind instrument)|yu]] players) one-by-one, (so) the reclusive scholar fled.'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=lànyúchōngshù
|c=laam6 jyu4 cung1 sou3
|cat=cy
}}

===Idiom===
{{zh-idiom}}

# to [[fill]] a [[position]] [[without]] [[having]] the [[necessary]] [[qualification]]s; to be a [[token]] [[member]] of a [[group]]; to [[masquerade]] as having an [[ability]]; to [[sell]] [[seconds]]s at [[best]]-[[quality]] [[price]]s

===References===
<references />