{{wikipedia|Himorogi}}
==Japanese==
{{ja-kanjitab|神|籬}}

===Alternative forms===
* {{l|ja|胙}}
* {{l|ja|膰}}

===Etymology 1===
/hi<sub>1</sub>moro<sub>2</sub>ki<sub>1</sub>/: [pimorəki] → [pimoroki] → [ɸimoroki] → [çimoroki]. Etymology is unknown. The initial /hi<sub>1</sub>/ is likely {{m|ja|霊|tr=hi<sub>1</sub>||spiritual power}}. Suggestions for /moro<sub>2</sub>/ include either {{m|ja|森|tr=mori||forest}} or {{m|ja|守る|tr=moru||protect}}. The final -ki<sub>1</sub> is not related to the phonetically distinct {{m|ja|木|tr=ki<sub>2</sub>||tree}}.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ひもろき}}

# in Shintō, a holy area surrounded by a barrier of trees; used as a place to summon and worship gods
#* 720: [[w:Nihon Shoki|Nihon Shoki]] (page 153)
#*: 汝天兒屋命・太玉命、宜持天津'''神籬'''、降於葦原中國、亦爲吾孫奉齋焉。
#* 720: [[w:Nihon Shoki|Nihon Shoki]] (page 239)
#*: [...] 祭於倭笠縫邑。仍立磯堅城'''神籬'''。<small>'''神籬'''、此云'''此莽呂岐'''。</sub>
#* 720: [[w:Nihon Shoki|Nihon Shoki]] (page 261)
#*: 三年春三月、新羅王子天日槍來歸焉。將來物、羽太玉一箇、足高玉一箇、鵜鹿々赤石玉一箇、出石小刀一口、出石桙一枝、日鏡一面、熊'''神籬'''一具、併七物。[...] 仍貢獻物、葉細珠、足高珠鵜鹿々赤石珠、出石刀子、出石槍、日鏡、熊'''神籬'''、膽狹淺大刀、併八物。
#* 720: [[w:Nihon Shoki|Nihon Shoki]] (page 277-279)
#*: 於是、清彦被勅、乃自捧神寶而獻之。羽太玉一箇・足高玉一箇・鵜鹿鹿赤石玉一箇・日鏡一面・熊'''神籬'''一具。
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|11|2657}}
#*: 神名火尓 '''紐呂寸'''立而 雖忌 人心者 間守不敢物

===Etymology 2===
/hi<sub>1</sub>boro<sub>2</sub>ki<sub>1</sub>/: [piborəki] → [piboroki] → [ɸiboroki] → [çiboroki]. From earlier '''himoroki'''. Medial bilabial -m- looses nasality and becomes a plosive -b-.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ひぼろき}}

# in Shintō, a holy area surrounded by a barrier of trees; used as a place to summon and worship gods
#* {{RQ:Wamyō Ruijushō}}
#*: '''神籬''' 日本記云、'''神籬'''、俗云'''比保路岐'''

===Etymology 3===
/hi<sub>1</sub>moro<sub>2</sub>gi<sub>1</sub>/: [pimorəki] → [pimoroki] → [ɸimoroki] → [ɸimorogi] → [çiborogi]. From earlier '''himoroki''. Final -k- voices to -g-.

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ひもろぎ}}

# in Shintō, a holy area surrounded by a barrier of trees; used as a place to summon and worship gods

=====Synonyms=====
* {{l|ja|斎垣}}, {{l|ja|忌垣}} (ikaki, igaki)
* {{l|ja|瑞垣}}, {{l|ja|瑞籬}}, {{l|ja|水垣}} (mizukaki, mizugaki)

===References===
* {{R:Wamyō Ruijushō}}
* {{cite-book
|last=Sakamoto
|first=Tarō
|coauthors=Ienaga Saburō, Inoue Mitsusada, [[w:Ōno Susumu|Ōno Susumu]]
|title=Nihon Koten Bungaku Taikei: Nihon Shoki (vol. 1)
|publisher=[[w:Iwanami Shoten Publishing|Iwanami Shoten]]
|year=1965
|isbn=4-000-60067-2}}
* {{R:Man'yōshū 3}}