{{also|结草}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=结草}}

===Etymology===
* '''480 {{B.C.E.}}:''' [[w:Zuo Qiuming|Zuo Qiuming]], ''[[w:Zuo Zhuan|Zuo Zhuan]]'' ([[:zh:s:春秋左氏傳/宣公#宣公十五年|春秋左氏傳/宣公十五年]])
*: [[秋]]，[[七]][[月]]，[[秦桓公]][[伐]][[晉]]，[[次]][[於]][[輔氏]]。[[壬午]]，[[晉侯]][[治兵]][[於]][[稷]]，[[以]][[畧]][[狄]][[土]]，[[立]][[黎侯]][[而]][[還]]。[[及]][[雒]]，[[魏顆]][[敗]][[秦]][[師]][[於]][[輔氏]]，[[獲]][[杜囘]]，[[秦]][[之]][[力人]][[也]]。[[初]]，[[魏武子]][[有]][[嬖妾]]，[[無]][[子]]，[[武子]][[疾]]，[[命]][[顆]][[曰]]，[[必]][[嫁]][[是]]。[[疾病]][[則]][[曰]]，[[必]][[以]][[為]][[殉]]。[[及]][[卒]]，[[顆]][[嫁]][[之]]，[[曰]]，[[疾病]][[則]][[亂]]，[[吾]][[從]][[其]][[治]][[也]]。[[及]][[輔氏]][[之]][[役]]，[[顆]][[見]][[老人]]'''結草'''[[以]][[亢]][[杜囘]]，[[杜囘]][[躓]][[而]][[顛]]，[[故]][[獲]][[之]]。[[夜]][[夢]][[之]]，[[曰]]，[[余]]，[[而]][[所]][[嫁]][[婦人]][[之]][[父]][[也]]，[[爾]][[用]][[先人]][[之]][[治命]]，[[余]][[是]][[以]][[報]]。
*:: ''(In 594 {{B.C.E.}}) during autumn, in the 7th lunar month, Duke Huan of [[w:Qin (state)|Qin]] led an expedition against [[w:Jin (state)|Jin]], pitching camp at [[w:Dali County|Fushi]] (present day [[w:Dali County|Dali County]]). On (the zodiac day of) [[w:Yin and yang|Yang]] [[w:Water (Wu Xing)|Water]] [[w:Horse (zodiac)|Horse]], Marquis of [[w:Jin (state)|Jin]] had been training his army at [[w:Yuncheng|Ji]] (south of present day [[w:Yuncheng|Jishan County]]), so that he could seize the lands of the [[w:Beidi|Di]] people. After installing Marquis of Li there, Marquis of [[w:Jin (state)|Jin]] returned home (in order to mount a defense against the [[w:Qin (state)|Qin]]). However, by the time Marquis of [[w:Jin (state)|Jin]] arrived at [[Luoyang|Luo]] (present day [[Luoyang]]), Wei Ke (of [[w:Jin (state)|Jin]]) had already defeated the [[w:Qin (state)|Qin]] army at [[w:Dali County|Fushi]], taking a powerful man from [[w:Qin (state)|Qin]], named Du Hui, as his prisoner. As it turns out, (Wei Ke's father) Wei Wuzi had a favorite concubine, who was childless. When Wuzi was ill, he instructed Ke, saying that Ke should marry her off. Later, when Wuzi had become gravely ill, Wuzi said that she must be buried alive in his grave. After his father's death, Ke married her off, saying, "My father was gravely ill, so his thinking was muddled; I will abide by the instructions he gave me when he was still in control of his faculties." Later on, during the battle of [[w:Dali County|Fushi]], Ke saw an old man '''making a rope out of grass''' in order to block Du Hui’s path. Du Hui tripped on the rope and fell. As a result, Ke was able to capture him. That night, Ke had a dream about the old man, who said to him, "I am the father of the woman that you married off. You abided by the instructions that your father gave you when he was still in control of his faculties. I (did) this in order to repay you."'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=jiécǎo
|cat=v
}}

===Verb===
{{zh-verb}}

# {{lb|zh|literary}} to [[repay]] a [[debt]] (of [[kindness]] etc.)

====Derived terms====
{{zh-der|結草銜環}}

[[zh:結草]]