==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=天涯若比邻|type=212}}

===Etymology===
Literally: the far ends of heaven are like next door
* ''c.'' '''647 – 675:''' [[w:Wang Bo|Wang Bo]], ''送杜少府之任蜀州'' (Seeing off Vice-[[prefect]] Du on the occasion of his appointment to the state of [[w:Shu (state)|Shu]])
*: [[城闕]][[輔]][[三秦]]，[[風煙]][[望]][[五津]]。[[與]][[君]][[離別]][[意]]，[[同]][[是]][[宦]][[游]][[人]]。[[海內]][[存]][[知己]]，'''天涯若比鄰'''。[[無]][[為]][[在]][[歧路]]，[[兒女]][[共]][[沾]][[巾]]。
*:: The watch towers<ref>Most commentaries explain that [[城闕]] (watch towers on the city walls) is a reference to the capital city of [[w:Chang'an|Chang'an]]. One other possibility is that it refers to the watch towers of the town where Vice-[[prefect]] Du is to be assigned. According to this interpretation, the author is expressing praise for the prestige of his friend's future assignment (''lit.'' The watch towers of the town where you will be assigned provide protection to the three Qin states).</ref> are protected by the three Qin states<ref>[[w:Former Qin|Former Qin]], [[w:Later Qin|Later Qin]] and [[w:Western Qin|Western Qin]]</ref>, I can make out the land<ref>Some commentaries explain that [[風煙]] was a synonym for [[風景]] (landscape). This is the interpretation used here.</ref> of the five crossings<ref>A reference to the five ferry crossings of the [[w:Minjiang River (Sichuan)|Minjiang River (Sichuan)]].</ref> in the distance. My mood (is somber) as I part from you, We are both officials traveling (far from home). When one has a close friend in this world, '''the far ends of heaven are like next door'''. (Therefore, when we reach the) fork in the road (where we must part), let us not exchange kerchiefs moistened (with tears like) women and children. (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=tiānyá ruò bǐlín
|c=tin1 ngaai4 joek6 bei2 leon4
|cat=id
}}

===Idiom===
{{zh-idiom}}

# to feel a closeness to a friend or loved one despite being separated by a great distance
#* '''2004:''' ''anon.'', [http://www1.people.com.cn/BIG5/it/1069/2968698.html www.people.com.cn]
#*: '''天涯若比鄰'''—[[在]]MSN Messenger[[中]][[搜索]][[好友]]
#*:: '''''Staying connected''' - Using MSN Messenger to find friends.''

===Usage notes===
* This phrase is often used when talking about the internet, long-distance phones etc.

====Derived terms====
{{zh-der|海內存知己，天涯若比鄰}}

===References===
<references />

* {{cite-web
|url=http://www.qingshi.net/news_view.asp?newsid=2810
|title=唐詩鑒賞 Apreciating Tang Poetry(2005, 施蜇存 Shi Zhecun)
|work=www.qingshi.net
|language=Mandarin
|accessdate=2008-05-19}}
* {{cite-web
|url=http://www.epochtimes.com/b5/3/10/13/c15093.htm
|title=唐詩欣賞 Tang Poetry Apreciation (2003, 文思格 Wen Sige)
|work=www.epochimes.com
|language=Mandarin
|accessdate=2008-05-19}}

[[zh:天涯若比鄰]]