==Japanese==

===Alternative forms===
* {{ja-l|伊弉諾}}; {{ja-l|伊耶那岐}}

===Etymology===
{{ja-kanjitab|い|じゃ|k2=ざ|な|き|yomi=o}}
{{ja-kanjitab|い|じゃ|k2=ざ|な|ぎ|yomi=o}}
Uncertain. Various theories exist, including:

* {{etyl|ojp|ja|sort=いざなぎ}} {{m|ja|いざ|tr=iza|pos=a beckoning interjection or call similar to {{m|en|hey}} and the root of verb {{m|ja|誘う|tr=izanau||to beckon, to call; to tempt}}}} + {{m|ja|な|tr=na|pos={{etyl|ojp|ja|sort=いざなぎ}} possessive particle, superseded by {{ja-l|の||no}}}} + {{m|ja|き|tr=ki||male|pos=common element in Japanese male given names}}
*: This theory dates to 1798 in the {{lang|ja|古事記伝}} (''Kojiki-den'', “Commentaries on the Kojiki”) by [[w:Motoori Norinaga|Motoori Norinaga]], a scholar of ancient Japanese. This etymology would suggest that the name ''Izanagi'' meant something like “the (male) caller, the (male) beckoner”, perhaps in reference to Izanagi's calling forth of the islands of Japan from the sea.

* ''iza'' as alteration of ''isa'' from {{m|ja|功|tr=isao||deed, exploit}} + {{m|ja|な|tr=na|pos={{etyl|ojp|ja|sort=いざなぎ}} possessive particle}} + {{m|ja|き|tr=ki||male}}
*: This dates to the 1954 book {{lang|ja|神代史の新研究}} (''Jindaishi no Shin Kenkyū'', “New Research into the Chronicles of the Age of Gods”) by Kurakichi Shiratori. A possible flaw is that ''isao'' derives from older adjectival form ''isawoshi'', and further truncation from ''isao'' to ''isa'' might seem unlikely. However, ''isa'' is found as a root in other words such as {{m|ja|勇める|tr=isameru||to add power to: to encourage, to urge onwards}} or {{ja-l|鯨}}, {{m|ja|勇魚|tr=isana||whale|pos=apparently ''isa'' “power” + ''na'' “fish”}}.

* ''izana'' as alteration of ''ishana'' in Buddhist term {{m|ja|伊舎那天|tr=Ishanaten|pos=the ruler of the sixth heaven of the realm of cravings}} + {{m|ja|き|tr=ki||male}}
*: This theory is one of the older ones, dating to a text in 1339 by [[w:Kitabatake Chikafusa|Kitabatake Chikafusa]], the {{lang|ja|神皇正統記}} (''[[w:Jinnō Shōtōki|Jinnō Shōtōki]]'', “Chronicles of the Authentic Lineages of the Divine Emperors”). The ''ishana'' in ''Ishanaten'' is a borrowing from {{etyl|sa|ja|sort=いざなぎ}} {{m|sa|ईशान|tr=īśāna||lord, ruler}}, which is suggestively also used in Sanskrit as an [[epithet]] for [[Vishnu]], the Hindu god of creation and existence. A possible flaw is that it may be unlikely to use a borrowed Buddhist term for a native creation god. However, Buddhism arrived in Japan around 552 (possibly even centuries earlier), or at least some 160 years before the first mention of Izanagi, perhaps leaving time for borrowed words to gain acceptance.

The pronunciation of the name shifted from ''Izanaki'' to ''Izanagi''. The older ''Izanaki'' is still used as an alternate reading.<ref name="DJR">{{R:Daijirin}}</ref>

===Pronunciation===
{{ja-pron|イザナギ|y=o}}

===Proper noun===
{{ja-pos|proper|いざなぎ|イザナギ|いざなき|イザナキ}}

# {{lb|ja|sort=いさなき''|Japanese mythology|Shinto}} [[Izanagi]], the [[Japanese]] [[creator]] [[god]], and the [[father]] of [[Amaterasu]], [[Tsukuyomi]] & [[Susanoo]]

====See also====
* {{pedialite|Izanagi}}
* {{pedialite|lang=ja}}
* {{ja-l|伊邪那美}}, {{ja-l|伊弉冉|いざなみ|Izanami}}: the Japanese creator [[goddess]], [[wife]] of [[Izanagi]]
* {{ja-l|天照|あまてらす|Amaterasu}}: the [[Japanese]] [[sun]] [[goddess]]
* {{ja-l|月読|つくよみ|Tsukuyomi}}: the [[Japanese]] [[moon]] [[god]]
* {{ja-l|須佐之男|すさのお|Susanoo}}: the [[Japanese]] [[storm]] [[god]]

===References===
<references/>
[[Category:Japanese terms spelled with ateji|いさなき'']]
{{catlangcode|ja|Gods|Japanese mythology|sort=いさなき''}}