{{also|唸珠}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|t2=唸珠}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=niànzhū,er=y
|c=nim6 zyu1
|mn=liām-chu
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# [[prayer beads]]; [[rosary]]
# [[bead]]

====Derived terms====
{{zh-der|念珠菌|念珠菌症}}

----

==Japanese==

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=o|ねん|す|k2=ず|r=y}}
From {{etyl|ltc|ja|sort=ねんず}} compound {{m|zh|念珠|tr=nem<sup>H</sup> t͡ɕio|lit=thinking + pearls}}, in reference to “beads used for thinking [about the [[Buddha]]]”: that is, [[prayer beads]], a [[rosary]]. The [[呉音#Japanese|goon]] reading, so likely the earliest borrowing. Note that the second character {{ja-l|珠}} has a goon reading of ''su''. {{rendaku2|sort=ねんず|su|zu}}

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|ねんず|acc=1|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ねんず}}

# [[prayer beads]], [[rosary]]

=====Usage notes=====
The reading ''nenzu'' is a [[homophone]] with several terms of related meanings:
* the older reading of the term {{m|ja|念誦|tr=nenzu}}, meaning “the act of focusing on the image of the [[Buddha]] within one's mind, and reciting or chanting the [[sutra]]s or the name of [[Buddha]]”.
* the classical Japanese verb {{m|ja|念ず|tr=nenzu}} (modern {{m|ja|念ずる}} ''nenzuru'' or {{m|ja|念じる}} ''nenjiru'') meaning “to pray, to pray for safety and protection, to recite silently (a prayer, chant, sutra, or the name of Buddha)”.
* the classical Japanese verb {{m|ja|捻ず}} or {{m|ja|拈ず|tr=nenzu|pos=obsolete in modern Japanese}}, meaning “to twist or twirl, to pinch or pick with the fingers”, much as one would twist or pinch the beads of the rosary.

Both the ''nenzu'' and ''nenju'' readings are still in use. ''Nenju'' appears to be more common.

=====Synonyms=====
* {{m|ja|数珠|tr=juzu</i>, <i>zuzu}}

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=o|ねん|しゅ|k2=じゅ|r=y}}
Alteration of ''nenzu'' above, using the [[漢音#Japanese|kan'on]] reading of ''shu'' for the {{ja-l|珠}} character.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref><ref name="DJR">{{R:Daijirin}}</ref> {{rendaku2|sort=ねんじゅ|shu|ju}}

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=o|ねんじゅ|acc=1|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ねんじゅ}}

# [[prayer beads]], [[rosary]]

=====Usage notes=====
The reading ''nenju'' is a [[homophone]] with the relatively newer reading of the term {{m|ja|念誦|tr=nenju}}, meaning “the act of focusing on the image of the [[Buddha]] within one's mind, and reciting or chanting the [[sutra]]s or the name of [[Buddha]]”.

Both the ''nenzu'' and ''nenju'' readings are still in use. ''Nenju'' appears to be more common.

=====Synonyms=====
* {{m|ja|数珠|tr=juzu</i>, <i>zuzu}}

===References===
<references/>

----

==Korean==
{{ko-hanjatab}}

===Noun===
{{ko-noun|hj|hangeul=염주}}

# {{hanja form of|염주|[[prayer beads]], [[rosary]]}}

[[zh-min-nan:念珠]]
[[ko:念珠]]
[[mg:念珠]]
[[chr:念珠]]
[[zh:念珠]]