{{also|阳炎}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=阳炎}}

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=yángyán
|c=joeng4 jim4
|cat=n
}}

===Noun===
{{zh-noun}}

# [[dazzling]] [[sunlight]], [[glare]] of [[sunlight]]

----

==Japanese==
{{was fwotd|2015|October|18|lang=ja}}

===Etymology 1===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=irreg|sort=かぎろい}}
{{IPAchar|*/kagiru hi/}} → {{IPAchar|/kagirohi/}} → {{IPAchar|/kagiroi/}}

Originally a compound of {{compound|lang=ja|sort=かげろう|かぎる|tr1=kagiru|t1=to shine, to shimmer|pos1=obsolete, only found in compounds; cognate with {{m|ja|影}} ''kage'', “shadow”, and with the ''kaga'' element in {{m|ja|炫}} ''kaga'', ''kagaya'', “shining, shimmering”; {{m|ja|輝く}} ''kagayaku'', “to shine, to sparkle”|火|tr2=hi|t2=fire, flame}}.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref>

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|かぎろい|acc=0}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|かぎろい|hhira=かぎろひ}}

# {{lb|ja|sort=かぎろい|archaic}} [[heat]] [[shimmer]], [[heat haze]]
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|10|1835}}, text [http://jti.lib.virginia.edu/japanese/manyoshu/Man10Yo.html#1835 here]:
#*: {{lang|ja|今更 雪零目八方 '''蜻火'''之 燎留春部常 成西物乎}}
#*: {{lang|ja|今さらに 雪降らめやも '''かぎろひ'''の 燃ゆる春へと なりにしものを}}
#*:: {{lang|ja|いまさらに ゆきふらめやも '''かぎろひ'''の もゆるはるへと なりにしものを}}
#*:: ''Ima sara ni / yuki furame ya mo / '''kagirohi''' no / moyuru haru he to / narinishi mono wo''
#*::: And now already, when snow shall not fall, it has become the springtime with its smouldering '''heat haze'''
# {{lb|ja|sort=かぎろい|archaic}} the [[glow]] of [[dawn]]
#* {{RQ:Man'yōshū|1|48}}, text [http://jti.lib.virginia.edu/japanese/manyoshu/Man1Yos.html#48 here]:
#*: {{lang|ja|東 野'''炎''' 立所見而 反見為者 月西渡}}
#*: {{lang|ja|東の 野に'''かぎろひ'''の 立つ見えて かへり見すれば 月かたぶきぬ}}
#*:: {{lang|ja|ひむがしの のに'''かぎろひ'''の たつみえて かへりみすれば つきかたぶきぬ}}
#*:: ''Himugashi no / no ni '''kagirohi''' no / tatsu miete / kaherimi sureba / tsuki katabukinu''
#*::: In the field of the east, the start of the '''dawn's glow''' can be seen, and looking back the other way, the moon has begun to set

=====Usage notes=====
In general use, this term has been replaced by the modern form ''kagerō'' below.

Used in poetry and formal writing as a {{m|ja|枕詞|tr=makura kotoba}}, a kind of [[epithet]], to precede certain terms.
* {{lang|ja|陽炎の}}{{m|ja|春|tr=kagiroi no haru}}: “heat-hazy spring” → introduces the idea of springtime, from the way that fields often shimmer in the heat of a sunny spring day.
* {{lang|ja|陽炎の}}{{m|ja|心燃ゆ|tr=kagiroi no kokoro-moyu}}: “heat-hazy heart-burning” → in reference to the heat of one's [[passion]] (note that this is not {{m|en|heartburn}} in the English term's sense of {{m|en|indigestion}}).

===Etymology 2===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=irreg|sort=かげろい}}
{{IPAchar|/kagiroi/}} → {{IPAchar|/kageroi/}}

Shift in pronunciation from ''kagiroi'' above.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref>

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|かげろい|acc=0}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|かげろい|hhira=かげろひ}}

# {{lb|ja|sort=かぎろい|archaic}} [[heat]] [[shimmer]], [[heat haze]]

=====Usage notes=====
In general use, this term has been replaced by the modern form ''kagerō'' below.

===Etymology 3===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=irreg|sort=かげろう}}
{{IPAchar|/kageroi/}} → {{IPAchar|/kagerou/}} → {{IPAchar|/kageroː/}}

Shift in pronunciation from ''kageroi'' above.<ref name="KDJ">{{R:Kokugo Dai Jiten}}</ref> This is the most common reading.

Starting from the [[w:Heian period|Heian period]], used in poetry to [[allude]] to something [[indistinct]], or something that might not be there; compare use of the {{etyl|en|-}} term {{m|en|mirage}}. Also used as an [[allusion]] or [[metaphor]] for something [[ephemeral]] or [[fleeting]].

Associated with the season of [[spring]].

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=k|かげろう|acc=2|acc_ref=NHK,DJR|acc2=0|acc2_ref=DJR}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|かげろう}}

# [[heat]] [[shimmer]], [[heat haze]]

=====Idioms=====
* {{ja-r|linkto=陽炎稲妻水の月|陽炎 稲妻 水 の 月|かげろう いなずま みず の つき}}: “[[heat haze]], lightning, the moon [reflected] in water” → a metaphor for something [[unobtainable]]; compare {{m|en|pie in the sky}}

=====Usage notes=====
This ''kagerō'' form is the modern reading.

Used in writing as a {{m|ja|枕詞|tr=makura kotoba}}, a kind of [[epithet]], to precede certain terms.
* {{lang|ja|陽炎の}}{{m|ja|小野|tr=kagerō no Ono}}: “heat-hazy Ono” → introduces places called ''Ono'' (literally “small field”), from the way that fields often shimmer in the heat of a sunny day.
* {{lang|ja|陽炎の}}{{m|ja|石|tr=kagerō no ishi}}: “heat-hazy stones” → in reference to a place with exposed stone, such as a stone wall, boulders, or a riverbed.

===Etymology 4===
{{ja-kanjitab|yomi=on|よう|えん}}
{{IPAchar|/jauen/}} → {{IPAchar|/jɔːen/}} → {{IPAchar|/joːen/}}

From {{etyl|ltc|ja|sort=ようえん}} compound {{m|zh|陽炎|tr=yang hjem|lit=sun + burn, blazing}}. Compare modern {{etyl|cmn|-}} {{zh-l|陽炎|yángyán|sun glare}}.

====Pronunciation====
{{ja-pron|yomi=goon|ようえん|acc=0|acc_ref=DJR}}

====Noun====
{{ja-noun|ようえん|hhira=やうえん}}

# [[heat]] [[shimmer]], [[heat haze]]

=====Usage notes=====
Less common than the ''kagerō'' reading above.

===References===
<references/>

----

==Korean==
{{ko-hanjatab}}

===Noun===
{{ko-noun|hj|hangeul=양염}}

# {{hanja form of|양염|heat haze; waves of heat; heat waves; (a veil of) heat shimmer; shimmering of heated air}}

[[fr:陽炎]]
[[mg:陽炎]]
[[ja:陽炎]]