{{also|塞翁失马}}
==Chinese==
{{zh-forms|s=塞翁失马}}

===Etymology===
From: [[塞翁失馬，焉知非福]] ('''When the old man from the frontier lost his horse''', how could one know it is not [[good fortune]]?)
* '''139 {{B.C.E.}}:''' [[w:Liu An|Liu An]], ''[[:zh:s:淮南子/人間訓]]'' ([[w:Huainanzi|Huainanzi]])
*: [[夫]][[禍]][[福]][[之]][[轉]][[而]][[相]][[生]]，[[其]][[變]][[難]][[見]][[也]]。[[近]][[塞]][[上]][[之]][[人]][[有]][[善]][[術]][[者]]，[[馬]][[無]][[故]][[亡]][[而]][[入]][[胡]]，[[人]][[皆]][[弔]][[之]]。[[其]][[父]][[曰]]：「[[此]][[何]][[遽]][[不]][[為]][[福]][[乎]]！」[[居]][[數]][[月]]，[[其]][[馬]][[將]][[胡]][[駿馬]][[而]][[歸]]，[[人]][[皆]][[賀]][[之]]。[[其]][[父]][[曰]]：「[[此]][[何]][[遽]][[不]][[能]][[為]][[禍]][[乎]]！」[[家]][[富]][[良]][[馬]]，[[其]][[子]][[好]][[騎]]，[[墮]][[而]][[折]][[其]][[髀]]，[[人]][[皆]][[弔]][[之]]。[[其]][[父]][[曰]]：「[[此]][[何]][[遽]][[不]][[為]][[福]][[乎]]！」[[居]][[一]][[年]]，[[胡]][[人]][[大]][[入]][[塞]]，[[丁壯]][[者]][[引]][[弦]][[而]][[戰]]，[[近]][[塞]][[之]][[人]]，[[死]][[者]][[十]][[九]]，[[此]][[獨]][[以]][[跛]][[之]][[故]]，[[父]][[子]][[相]][[保]]。[[故]][[福]][[之]][[為]][[禍]]，[[禍]][[之]][[為]][[福]]，[[化]][[不可]][[極]]，[[深]][[不可]][[測]][[也]]。
*:: ''It can be difficult to foresee the twists and turns which compel misfortune to beget fortune, and vice versa. There once was an old man, skilled in divination, who lived close to the '''frontier''' (with his son). One of his '''horses''' accidentally strayed into the lands of the [[w:Xiongnu|Xiongnu]], so everyone consoled him. (But) the old man said, "Why should I hastily (conclude) that this is not fortunate?" After several months, the horse came back from the land of the [[w:Xiongnu|Xiongnu]], accompanied by another stallion, so everyone congratulated him. (But) the father said, "Why should I hastily (conclude) that this can not be unfortunate?". One day (the son) fell off the stallion, and broke his leg, so everyone consoled (the father). (But) the father said, "Why should I hastily (conclude) that this is not fortunate?" One year later, the [[w:Xiongnu|Xiongnu]] invaded the frontier, and all able-bodied men took up arms and went to war. Of the men from the frontier (who volunteered), nine out of ten men perished (from the fighting). It was only because of (the son's) broken leg, that the father and son were spared (this tragedy). Therefore misfortune begets fortune, and fortune begets misfortune. This goes on without end, and its depths can not be measured.'' (Wiktionary translation)

===Pronunciation===
{{zh-pron
|m=sàiwēngshīmǎ
|c=coi3 jung1 sat1 maa5
|cat=prov
}}

===Proverb===
{{zh-proverb}}

# A setback may turn out to be a blessing in disguise.
# Every cloud has a silver lining.

====Descendants====
* Japanese: {{m|ja|塞翁が馬|tr=saiō ga uma}}

[[ko:塞翁失馬]]
[[ja:塞翁失馬]]